32. On the inflation front, retail inflation recorded a five-month high in August, 2017. This was driven partly by the dissipation of the favourable base effect and a rebound in food inflation, due to an increase in vegetable prices. CPI inflation, excluding food and fuel, rose sharply as a result of hardening of prices in several categories. Housing inflation increased on account of higher house rent allowances for central government employees under the 7th central pay commission award. Other sub-groups witnessing an increase included household goods and services, clothing, footwear, and miscellaneous items.

33. Brent crude oil prices also surged in September, while the rupee weakened. Other upside risks to inflation include the impact of an expected decline in the production of foodgrains due to lower sowing during the kharif season; the uncertainty in the short-term with respect to the effect of GST; the effects of a possible central government stimulus; the likely fiscal slippages due to the farm loan waivers; and the introduction of the pay commission award by states. Further, a potential increase in financial market volatility due to global developments, including the unwinding of the balance sheet by the Fed and the possibility of normalisation by the ECB, are also major concerns.

34. These risks to inflation are reinforced by the responses to forward-looking surveys of consumers. Specifically, the qualitative responses to the September 2017 round of the Reserve Bank’s Inflation Expectations Survey of households indicate that the proportion of respondents expecting the general price level to increase by more than the current rate rose over the three-month as well as the one-year horizons. The September round of the Consumer Confidence Survey also signals the expectation of an increase in the price level in the next one year. Moreover, an uptick in the Indian Future Inflation Gauge, a harbinger of inflation (constructed by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, with which the author is affiliated), indicates a firming in underlying inflationary pressures.

35. On the output front, GDP growth slowed down significantly in the first quarter of 2017-18, reflecting slower agricultural and manufacturing growth, along with tepid consumption and investment demand. Growth in services sector, however, picked up with an uptick in trade, hotels, transport and communication. The lacklustre growth is picked up by the September round of the Reserve Bank’s Consumer Confidence Survey, which shows a fall in the Current Situation Index as well as the Future Expectations Index, due to worsening sentiment on income and employment. Furthermore, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Index, a predictor of future economic activity, has eased in recent months. This suggests an urgent need to revive investment activity and reinvigorate infrastructure-related projects, amongst other measures.

36. At the same time, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Exports Index, that anticipates the direction of growth in exports, is declining. It is also notable in this context that, while international growth is currently robust, ECRI’s Leading Indexes of the global economy indicate waning global growth prospects.

37. In the current scenario, a wait and watch strategy is recommended with continuous monitoring of data to distinguish between a temporary effect and a long-lasting, structural impact.

38. Thus, I vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged.