36. I am not in agreement with the assessment of the RBI for both the CPI inflation and the economic growth prospects in the near term. I also do not share its over-concerns for the upside risks on inflation and over-optimism on economic growth front. In my opinion, the inflation situation is under reasonable control and is likely to remain well within the acceptable range during the foreseeable future because after a couple of months favourable base effects will set in. The real cause of concern right now is the economic recovery and its slow pace. Fiscal space is more or less exhausted but the space for the monetary boost has fortunately been available now for a relatively long period. Had the policy rate been cut to 5.75 per cent in June 2017 as I had argued then, the economic recovery would have been far more rapid and we would have been in a much better position. Although we have missed the bus, it is still better late than never. In my opinion, we must cut the policy rate by at least 25 basis points to begin with if we want to be on conservative side, because enough space existed all along. The specific reasons for my recommendation are as follows:

Although the recent most round of RBI’s household inflationary expectation survey shows an increase of about 60 basis points (bps) for inflation one year ahead, overall it shows a substantial decline of about 280 bps over the last year or so. A very consistent and more reliable result is obtained from the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) latest business expectation survey with more than 2100 responses that shows the headline CPI inflation expectation one year ahead to be 3.71 per cent – well below the RBI target of 4 per cent. The standard deviation for this estimate is also relatively low. Thus, inflationary expectations are very well anchored and inflation control does not seem to be a major issue in the near future, i.e. over next 6 to 12 months.

On the other hand, the RBI surveys show that consumer confidence on income, employment and overall economic environment is very low and declining in recent times. Companies still lack the pricing power and experience squeeze in their profit margins.

Better performing and financially sound companies according to the RBI surveys are investing more in financial assets than in physical assets. They behave more like savers than investors because the real rate of interest is too high to encourage long term investment. Even consumers would be discouraged to consume durable goods. It needs to be noted that the real rate of interest is the difference between nominal rate of interest and expected rate of inflation (and not the observed rate of inflation in the recent past).

Despite the marginal economic recovery, the capacity utilization in Indian industry according to the RBI surveys continues to be at low level of 72 per cent indicating persistent existence of output gap. Service sector PMI is also declining and in the pessimist zone.

The growth recovery expectation of RBI during the June-September quarter of 2017 turned out to be a substantial overstatement. As against RBI’s expectation of 6.4 per cent, the growth of real GVA during the quarter turned out to be only 6.1 per cent. Yet, the RBI has not revised its growth forecast from the earlier 6.7 percent for the year 2017-18. This implies that RBI now expects a higher growth of 7.0 and 7.8 per cent respectively in the third and fourth quarters of 2017-18. This is highly improbable to be achieved without any policy rate cut because fiscal space is practically non-existent and the conditions described in points (ii) to (iv) above are posing a big challenge. Expecting an unrealistically higher growth rates during the 3rd and 4th quarters creates a false hope of the output gap closing on its own in near future so as to continue with the policy inaction.

On the contrary, since the recovery has been slow and the confidence low, I expect the growth during the year 2017-18 to be much lower at only 6.4 per cent, which implies a growth rate of 6.7 and 7.2 per cent respectively for the 3rd and 4th quarters. Moreover, unlike my colleagues on the MPC, I firmly believe that the output gap would not start narrowing unless the current growth rate exceeds 8 – 8.5 per cent. It means that, in my opinion, the output gap is going to expand till the middle of the next year. That, in itself, will put downward pressure on prices and neutralize several upside risks to inflation. Oil prices in my opinion are not likely to stay significantly higher than the current level for any longer time. Similarly, although the fiscal slippage is likely in percentage to GDP, it would not be substantial in absolute terms. The fiscal deficit as percentage of GDP may exceed the target because the nominal GDP would grow much slower than the assumed number (11.75 per cent) in the last budget on account of lower inflation and substantial slowdown in the real growth. However, the numerator that puts upward pressure on yield rates and prices is not likely to increase substantially in absolute terms and hence the inflationary impact would be limited.

It is important to recognize that the RBI’s expectation about the headline inflation in the remaining two quarters of 2017-18 is in the range of 4.3 to 4.7 per cent. If we exclude the pure statistical effect of revisions in the house rent allowance by the 7th Pay Commission for the government employees, the range of the RBI forecasts of both the headline and CPI excluding food and fuel show the relevant inflation rate hovering around 3.9 to 4.3 per cent over the rest of the year. Thus, there is a clear space for the rate reduction of at least 25 bps even without considering the output gap.

There are serious implications of keeping the real policy rate substantially higher than most other countries in the world. Currently, only eleven countries in the world have a positive real policy rate and several of them either are in some crisis or have recently emerged out of a crisis. Among the rest of the countries, India has the highest real rate. If the situation is not corrected soon, it has the potential to destabilize the financial markets at home by discouraging domestic investments and encouraging foreign investment in the debt market. It may involve substantial risks for future. On the other hand, by cutting the policy rate, the domestic corporate bond market, stock market and hence investment demand could be encouraged and growth can be accelerated to bridge the output gap.

37. Keeping all these points in mind, I vote for a 25 bps cut in the policy rate in December 2017.