25. Since the last review, headline inflation has inched up to 3.6 per cent. RBI’s quarterly projections of CPI inflation (including HRA) are based on crude prices being US $ 60 per barrel. Uncertainty because of geopolitical events could push up the price of crude higher than this value. As the Phillips Curve for the economy shifts up because of increases in crude prices, this poses an upside risk to the medium term inflation target of 4 per cent.

26. The increase in the wheat MSP by the government in October was the biggest increase in the past five years (both in absolute terms as well as percentage terms). My own research (with co-authors) shows how such procurement “shocks” can lead to a wage-price spiral ending up in generalized inflation. Separately, using the KLEMS database, I find that average annual total factor productivity (TFP) growth in agriculture in India between 1980 to 2011 is close to 1 per cent, with a very mild upward sloping (HP filtered) trend throughout the period. Stagnant agricultural productivity combined with a lopsided temporal distribution of rain like last year makes the agriculture sector continually vulnerable to price pressures that need to be carefully watched. Having said this, I am comforted by the fact that cereal inflation is lower with favourable base effects going forward. Kharif rice production is also consistent with production in the last five years. Pulses continue to face deflationary pressures, although base effects will be unfavourable in coming months. I see the 3-month and 1-year ahead inflationary expectations as stable but with an uptick. With the coming winter season, there will possibly be the usual seasonal moderation in vegetables. Inflation, excluding food, fuel, and housing till date is constant around 4.1 per cent which is somewhat comforting.

27. Compared to the last review, various risks are materializing around inflation becoming generalized and need to be watched carefully. The positive co-movement between the output gap and inflation excluding food and fuel since 2010-11 suggests that a closing output gap will generate demand-pull pressures on inflation as growth revives. The conquest of Indian inflation is certainly not a done deal!

28. As I mentioned in my last review, the weakness in growth drivers continues to worry me. While both GVA and GDP growth rebounded after sequential declines over the last 5 quarters, the growth revival lacks animal spirits. Consumption, the main stay of the Indian economy, at 54 per cent, exhibits a declining share of GDP. Consumer confidence is the lowest since September 2013. There has been a reversal of the commodity price cycle. Investment demand continues to be muted, despite a recent uptick in Q2 of 2017-18. While merchandise exports are likely to see a sustained recovery as GST disruptions fade, exports are far too volatile to be a reliable source of aggregate demand in the short term. The November 2017 PMI in services also turned into contraction mode. Various factors however bode well for the growth process (GST, favourable impact of global growth, incipient turn around in credit growth, pay commission, and bank recapitalization). More certainty on growth trends will be available in the next couple of months after the release of Advance GDP Estimates and the Union Budget, making it prudent to wait and watch.

29. Taking these considerations into account, I vote for a pause in the policy repo rate at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.