56. Excluding the house rent allowance (HRA) impact under the 7th central pay commission (CPC), the current assessment is that inflation during Q4 of 2017-18 would be lower than what it was projected in the last monetary policy review. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel has also softened over the last three months. Seasonally adjusted momentum moderated during this period. Available forward looking information on demand conditions for Q2 of 2017-18, particularly the RBI’s industrial outlook survey and the consumer confidence survey do not suggest much risk of immediate demand pressures. While the growth outlook in terms of projected GVA growth for 2017-18 is retained unchanged at 7.3 per cent, there are some signs of downside risks on the underlying growth momentum in industry and services. A normal monsoon for the second year in succession should help sustain some of the disinflationary impulses in food items that generally accompany improved supply conditions. The moderation in pulses prices is likely to continue in the medium-term on account of favourable supply conditions. I vote in favour of a cut in the policy repo rate by 25 basis points.

57. While using the space available for monetary accommodation to support growth, we retain the monetary policy stance as neutral for the following reasons. First, disentangling recent disinflation in terms of relative roles of structural and transitory drivers remains a challenge. Second, HRA will push up the inflation trajectory. Even if one excludes the direct HRA impact, one has to be vigilant about the second order effects, especially on inflation expectations as States would also start implementing revision in salary and allowances. Third, inflation expectations of households edged up even in an atmosphere of significant disinflation. Fourth, specific food items such as tomato exhibited sharp price pressures in recent weeks, which were not reflected in the low June 2017 inflation print. The present low level of food prices is unusual and is vulnerable to upward pressures. An assessment of whether the recent deflation in food items is sustainable, despite a normal monsoon, would require more hard data going forward. Fifth, while the frontloaded expenditure by the Central Government so far during the year has provided a boost to the economy, the implementation of farm debt waivers by the State Governments has significantly increased the fiscal risks and poses an upside risk to the inflation outlook.

58. Effective transmission of a policy rate cut is the key to achieving the goal of supporting the non-inflationary growth. By the Central Government’s own formula effective April 1, 2016, there is scope for administered interest rates to be reduced. While the transmission has improved, there is still some space for banks to cut their lending rates, especially on the existing loan portfolios. Credit growth has also been low partly because of risk aversion among banks on account of their stressed assets position. Resolution of stressed balance sheets of banks, therefore, will remain important for reviving credit demand and the investment cycle.