38. I vote for status quo.

39. All the upside risks to inflation cited in previous resolutions are materialising. Moreover, price pressures are no more confined to vegetables alone, as in previous readings; they are getting diffused across petroleum products, services (excluding housing, which is being pulled up independently by statistical effects of the house rent allowance for central government employees), and into underlying inflation. The risks of inflation getting generalised appear to have increased to a point where they could potentially overwhelm the softening effects of winter arrivals of vegetables and fruits. Projections indicate that inflation prints are likely to stay above target from here on.

40. Households’ inflation expectations have firmed up and are undermining consumer confidence. The pressure of input costs may soon force corporations to reflect them in selling prices as their margins get whittled down from absorbing these costs. Financial markets, especially the bond market segment, are scenting higher inflation in the air. The slosh of liquidity that marooned markets during the year so far is being steadily drained away by liquidity operations and a position of neutrality may emerge before the end of the financial year, abstracting maturing securities under the market stabilisation scheme and forex operations.

41. The current phase of accommodation in the monetary policy stance – reduction of the policy rate by 200 basis points - is one of the deepest barring the easing associated with the global financial crisis. Also, it has been more fully transmitted. In my view, this phase has matured; it is time now to signal its end and commence the withdrawal of accommodation, consistent with the evolving stance of liquidity management.

42. It is not that I am sanguine about growth; far from it. Rather than green shoots, my sense is that the upturn of Q2 occurred on the back of replenishment of inventories, and more incoming data are needed to tell us whether or not it is durable. The investment temper remains dormant, as evident in the persisting slump in the rate of capital formation. It awaits reforms that bite the bullet in terms of freeing up product and factor markets, removing barriers to entry and exit, and rekindling productivity and competitiveness all around. As growth regains solid ground, it could likely sustain inflation above the target.

43. The time has come for monetary policy to take guard and be ready to go on to the front foot.