40. Recent inflation prints have vindicated my stance. They have also borne out the expectations of households and professional forecasters. All the factors I cited came into play in the inflation reading for August - the house rent allowance (HRA) for Central Government employees; the GST; the unfavourable reversal of base effects; and the seasonal spike in the prices of vegetables. Some of these factors will gain further traction over the months ahead. The firming up of pump prices of petrol and diesel, only partly due to rising international crude prices, has provided an additional upside to the inflation outlook in a froth-suffused financial environment. The recent reduction in excise duties on petroleum products is an acknowledgement of the social tolerance threshold for inflation from this source.

41. By contrast, all the factors conditioning the August rate reduction have either not materialized or reversed - inflation excluding the HRA will likely exceed 4 per cent by the end of the year; inflation excluding food and fuel has turned up and will likely stay above 4 per cent in the months ahead; the rollout of the GST has not been smooth; and the monsoon is sub-normal in terms of its distribution during the crucial sowing weeks. With various alternative exclusion-based indicators of inflation above 4 per cent, a vicious spiral could be developing – input costs; petroleum product prices, exchange rate depreciation; inflation expectations. Professional forecasters project inflation rising to 5 per cent by the first quarter of 2018-19. Households’ qualitative expectations point to the rising probability of inflation rising faster than the current rate over the next three months.

42. Current inflation developments and, in particular, deviations of outcomes from forecasts are shaping the future path of inflation in an ongoing error correction. The primary objective of monetary policy enjoined by the RBI Act is challenged and the credibility of the MPC will be tested in the months ahead.

43. Meanwhile, growth outcomes have surprised on the downside. Parsing the data reveals that agricultural and allied activities are growing at broadly the same pace as in the first quarter of every year, while in the services sector, growth has accelerated. More recent indicators bear out these initial impulses. My sense is that the slowdown is troughing and activity will pick up in the second half of the year with better prospects for agriculture and services, and as the initial hitches associated with the GST get evened out.

44. The slowdown is essentially located in manufacturing, and reinvigorating it holds the key. The question is: is the weakness in manufacturing, which persists in spite of a reduction of 200 basis points in the policy rate, within the narrow remit of monetary policy? The advocacy for a further reduction in the policy rate is essentially a case for lowering the cost of capital or the hurdle rate to a level at which a subdued or even declining internal rate of return (IRR) becomes viable. In my view, this is not a sustainable proposition and may even be self-fulfilling: chasing a deteriorating IRR will only lead to higher inflation and no investment.

45. All indications point to a deeper malaise that chains down animal spirits in private enterprise and cries out for a bold structural transformation of the business and investment climate. The MPC’s resolution sets out the elements of the desired policy response that will revive investment activity. A monetary policy reaction in the absence of mobilising on these fronts is time-inconsistent – the MPC commits to an inflation target over a medium term horizon but the persuasive pull of the transient weakening of growth in the interregnum potentially undermines this commitment.

46. I, therefore, vote for status quo, but only as long as inflation readings stay within the target of 4 per cent. It is time to be in readiness to raise the policy rate to quell the underlying drivers of inflation if they strengthen further.