27. In the August review, I was concerned that the downward movement in both CPI headline inflation and inflation excluding food and fuel may not sustain into the durable future. With a roughly 200 basis points increase in headline inflation in the last two months, and with the acceleration of inflation excluding food and fuel to 4.6 per cent from 4.1 per cent, upside risks to the medium term inflation target of 4 per cent have again come to the fore. This suggests that the big dip in inflation excluding food and fuel starting in March has turned out to be temporary.

28. The rebound in headline inflation has largely been due to spikes in vegetable inflation that has made the CPI vegetable index come back to its earlier peak. I am also concerned about adverse demand-supply dynamics in crude prices which had led to a 22 per cent increase in crude prices since June 2017. A relaxation of end-year fiscal deficit targets if tax revenues take a hit due to GST-related disruptions also poses an upside risk to the medium term inflation target. On the other hand, I view the recent round of inflationary expectations data as positive, with the decline in the 3-month inflationary expectations being about 230 basis points since September 2016.

29. While there has been a secular decline in economic growth for the past 6 quarters, it is likely that the Q1:2017-18 GVA growth print of 5.6 per cent was possibly a trough, and that a revival in economic activity is possibly in the works. The economy has been subject to numerous policy shocks in the form of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), GST, Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act (RERA), loan waivers, and demonetisation, all of which have undoubtedly lead to some churning, but which will also move the economy to a reformed steady state. What makes me optimistic are the following factors: (i) both the August and September PMI in manufacturing have been in an expansion mode. (ii) An economic revival of the Eurozone will push up exports. (iii) Real wage growth of the magnitude of 6-8 per cent in the rural sector will continue to support consumption driven growth. Having said this, I continue to worry about the slowing rate of capital accumulation and its impact on lowering potential growth and total factor productivity (TFP), but would like to see the next GDP growth print to have a better sense of whether the current decline in growth is transient, or part of a secular trend.

30. In some joint research done by myself and some co-authors, on a calibrated/estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model of the Indian economy, the variance decomposition from the baseline model shows that about half of the fluctuations (variance) in output in the Indian economy in the last five years are explained by TFP shocks, and one-third is explained by fiscal shocks. Monetary policy shocks only explain around 12 per cent of output variations. This highlights not only the weakness of monetary policy transmission in the Indian economy, but the need for continual structural reforms and rule bound fiscal policy which will stabilize the Indian business cycle.

31. Taking into account these considerations, I vote for a pause in the policy repo rate at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.