27. While a significant decline in both headline inflation and inflation excluding food and fuel provides reason for cautious optimism, it remains unclear at this juncture whether these outcomes will sustain durably in the future. In fact, it is highly likely that inflation excluding food and fuel bottomed out in June. Momentum in June headline index has also picked up (because of the seasonal rebounds of some vegetables) with a reversal in the headline inflation trajectory expected from July. However, what is encouraging is that both the 3-month and 1-year median inflation expectations are stable, despite marginal upticks. The survey of professional forecasters (SPF) also conveys optimism on prices. The government’s push through on key structural reforms, i.e., the GST, will be akin to a positive supply shock in the long run, and will assist in the disinflationary process.

28. New data and information also provide more clarity on the magnitude of upside risks to headline inflation highlighted in my comments in the June review. First, there is more evidence that the current monsoon will be normal. Second, the rise in the housing price index because of HRA is likely to be more gradual than earlier envisaged. While upside risks in the form of second round effects will kick in as private rentals try to “keep up with the Jones’s”, these effects are likely to be muted because of depressed demand conditions in the real estate sector. Having said this, both farm loan waivers and proximity to the 2019 election year suggest that fiscal impulses could contribute to inflationary pressures. These need to be carefully watched. Given the above, at this juncture, I expect headline inflation to evolve in line with the medium-term inflation target of 4 per cent within a band of +/- 2 per cent.

29. A lexicographic flexible inflation-targeting mandate requires monetary policy to now accommodate the objective of growth. While re-monetisation, front loaded government expenditures and a good monsoon will sustain a positive momentum on growth, my biggest concern at the moment is the slowing rate of capital accumulation. Indebted manufacturing companies continue to de-leverage, and envisaged capex continues to decline. A prolonged period of weak investment growth will impact potential growth. Weak investment growth is also associated with slower growth in total factor productivity (TFP) in the long run which is the key driver of long-term real wage growth (after inflation). Both the industrial outlook survey and the consumer confidence survey conducted by the RBI suggest that negative output gaps will remain in Q2 also.

30. With the US Fed announcing a somewhat gradual tapering of its balance sheet to begin in the near term, some volatility from this “quantitative tightening” is likely to be imparted on EME exchange rates and financial markets, and needs to be carefully watched.

31. Taking into account these considerations, I vote for a 25 basis points (bps) cut in the policy repo rate from 6.25 per cent to 6.0 per cent at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.