39. During the last two months of July and August, the increase in the headline inflation as well as inflation without food and fuel was more than expected. My forecasts had provided for some spikes in inflation during these months, but the actual increase exceeded the forecasts. While the oil prices strengthened in the international markets, they are not expected to increase further substantially. Although the monsoon ended with a marginal shortfall in the rainfall, its impact on the food prices is not expected to be very adverse since the replenished buffer stocks would take care of whatever shortages occur. The real cause of concern right now is the estimates of real GDP during Q1 of 2017-18 that showed a significantly more than expected slowdown of economic activity indicating widening of the negative output gap in the economy. Considering these additional developments, I strongly plead for at least a 25 basis points (bps) cut in the policy rate. Reasons for my vote are the following:

Households’ one year ahead inflationary expectations according to the RBI survey have fallen over the last year sharply by 340 bps when the policy rate fell by only 50 bps. This implies a significant increase of 290 bps in the real interest rate for the households.

The Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) Business Inflation Expectation Survey (BIES) shows that the businesses expect inflation one year ahead to be around 3.5 per cent in their costs. This inflation number is generally closely akin to the core inflation.

RBI survey has found that companies have started investing in financial assets rather than fixed assets. It indicates that the real interest cost on one hand and real interest rate on the other hand perceived by the companies are too high. This is supported by the decline in the new projects announced.

My inflation forecasts over six months and one year have only marginally changed upwards since I expect oil prices and exchange rates to be reasonably stable over medium term. Moreover, we had considered earlier such scenarios in our forecasts. Even RBI’s forecast of inflation has not changed substantially and is around 4.3 per cent without the impact of revisions in house rent allowance. As I had mentioned in the August MPC minutes, our forecast is lower. In this context, it is worth observing that the headline inflation without including housing index is currently only around 3 per cent.

RBI surveys continue to show persistently low capacity utilization at around 71-72 per cent indicating a sizeable negative output gap in the production sector. This is also supported by RBI consumer confidence surveys showing worsening sentiments for income, employment and overall environment. RBI has also revised its GVA growth forecast downward in its October Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Review for 2017-18 by 60 bps and for 2018-19 by 70 bps in its October Monetary Policy Report (MPR) compared to its April 2017 MPR. This by itself suggests that the negative output gap in the economy has widened at present and would continue widening in near future since output gap is calculated on levels and not rates of growth, which implies that the negative output gap would start narrowing only when the current growth rate exceeds the potential rate of growth.

There are some sceptics who argue that in India, where physical infrastructure like roads and railways are over-crowded, a negative output gap simply cannot exist. However, this argument is not valid since it is based on misconception of the potential output. Congestion and overcrowding of certain type of physical infrastructure that could be due to wrong pricing and other policies usually lead to very low productivity and indicate sub-optimal allocation of resources. This corroborates rather than negating the existence of a negative output gap, because the potential output is defined in terms of the optimal utilization of resources and not the actual utilization of resources. For instance, previously congested and hence inefficient roads have turned more efficient with introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST). The existing capital is better utilized and produces more output. Moreover, we need to recognize that many other physical infrastructures like some airports, seaports, irrigation dams, hospitals, institutions of higher learning and several industrial plants and machinery lie severely underutilized. Similarly a significant proportion of the labour force is underutilized. Therefore, negative output gap and its widening at present as argued earlier cannot be denied.

A rule-based monetary policy underlying the Flexible Inflation Targeting framework would necessitate a very well justified policy rate cut under the present circumstances. Real interest rate with expected future inflation rate in the economy currently is too high compared to most other countries. Now it has started seriously hurting consumers of durable goods and producers and hence production. We also need to recognize explicitly the cost of sacrificing output growth in terms of unemployment and poverty when inflation situation is practically under control in the near to medium term. In order to address the problems created by expanding negative output gap, we need to bring down the real interest rate in the economy. In my view, the policy rate should have been cut by 50 bps long back in June 2017. A cut of 25 bps in August was too small and too late. We can still make the additional cut of 25 bps now if we want to be extremely cautious. Otherwise, my opinion is that we have a space for a cut of about 40 bps at present with due consideration to any possible upward risk to future inflation.