51. Inflation prints since the last policy have turned out even lower, though there are emerging signs that certain deflating food items are on a price rebound. Excluding the HRA impact, headline inflation is now projected to be lower in Q4 of 2017-18 as compared with the projection made in the last policy statement. More significantly, inflation excluding food and fuel has eased markedly, falling to around 4 per cent and suggesting a broad-based weakening of underlying demand. Our 12-month ahead headline inflation projection, without the statistical HRA effects, is now just above 4 per cent, even as the inflation path is projected to be on an upward trajectory. Households’ inflation expectations have, however, slightly moved up even in the face of recent low inflation prints.

52. Our output gap estimates turned somewhat negative after the last quarter's growth numbers and associated revisions. Together with easing of underlying inflation and given that our 12-month ahead inflation forecast (excluding the HRA impact) is in line with the mandated target, there seems some room for monetary policy accommodation. Hence, I vote for a policy repo rate cut by 25 basis points while retaining the neutral stance.

53. Why the neutral stance? I wish to reiterate that growth slowdown since Q1 2016-17 is rooted in the stressed balance-sheets of our banks and corporates in several sectors. Our output gap estimates that account for financing conditions using recent modelling advances do pick up this protracted slowdown. To address this, our efforts on stressed asset resolution are firmly underway. This very stress has also resulted in poor transmission of monetary policy (except after demonetisation, and only for fresh rupee loans, as bank deposits surged).

54. In my assessment, therefore, our focus at the present juncture should be on improving the conditions for sound transmission such as healthy bank and corporate balance sheets, market-based benchmarking of bank lending rates and a thriving corporate bond market. Higher real rates are justified in the meantime as absent efficient transmission, attempts to address symptoms of balance-sheet problems with aggressive monetary easing get wasted and can even backfire by misallocating investments, fuelling asset price inflation, creating false hopes of a growth boost, and relaxing the pedal on deeper structural reforms.

55. I remain concerned about the impact of farm loan waivers on inflation and growth, due to induced departure from fiscal discipline, shift in the nature of state spending and the crowding out of private credit by further state borrowings from the market. Given the additional uncertainty around how much of the real-time economic indicator surprises are due to the likely temporary impact of the GST rollout on business activity, careful scrutiny of upcoming data seems necessary. Hence, I prefer to keep the monetary stance neutral.