36. In the MPC meeting of 7th June 2017, I pleaded for a rate cut of 50 basis points from 6.25 per cent to 5.75 per cent providing several reasons to do so. Most of the developments and additional data points since then have only vindicated my stand and forecasts. In my opinion, MPC should effect a major cut of 50 basis points in the policy rate without losing any more time. My reasons for this recommendation in addition to the ones I mentioned in my statement in the Minutes of the June 7, 2017 meeting of MPC are the following:

37. Subsequent to the meeting of 7th June 2017, the two readings of inflation for the months of May and June 2017 that came in were closer to my forecast than the RBI’s. The RBI has also further revised its base forecast of inflation downward. It now expects the base inflation to be a little above 4 per cent by March 2018 without the statistical impact of the revision of HRA from the 7th Pay Commission. My estimates based on our independent exercise suggest that the base CPI inflation is likely to be about 50 basis points lower than the RBI forecast.

38. Our research now provides an empirical support from the data over the last five years to the hypothesis that the headline CPI inflation in India shows a tendency to drift towards the core inflation (excluding food and fuel) in the long run and not vice versa. I had indicated a possibility of such a result in my statement in the Minutes of the April 6, 2017 meeting of MPC, where I had also clearly stated that the core inflation according to our calculations is likely to show a declining trend over the coming year. The RBI has also acknowledged that the core inflation has shown a declining trend for the last three months (April, May and June). Our exercise suggests that the core inflation is on a declining path with minor spikes ultimately reaching around 3.1-3.5 per cent by March-April 2018. I expect the headline inflation also to show a converging trend over long term.

39. The Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) monthly Business Inflation Expectations Survey (BIES) started in May 2017 has provided two monthly readings by now – May and June 2017. Both these readings show that businesses in India expect their cost inflation a year ahead to be around 3 per cent. This measure of inflation closely traces the CPI core inflation. It provides further support to our empirical exercise and estimates derived independently. As it is very well recognised, the fears of upside risks to inflation considered so far either have not materialised or are considerably subdued except the statistical impact of the implementation of revised HRA for the government employees. The HRA impact in any case is a transient influence and not a permanent factor for inflation. However, this influence is likely to persist for 18-24 months because of sequential implementation of the HRA hikes by different states.

40. Monsoon for the second consecutive year is likely to be normal and progressing well. Procurement during the last year, some reforms in the agricultural sector and improvements in the logistics enabled by the introduction of GST may help keep the food inflation under control.

41. As I had argued in the June 7, 2017 meeting of MPC, the farm loan waiver by some states has not resulted in the “expected” fiscal slippage so far. In fact, the budget announced subsequently by the UP state government has absorbed the expenditure to manage the fiscal deficit at 2.97 per cent of the state income – just below the fiscal responsibility legislation (FRL) target of 3 per cent. Some of the states have staggered the implementation and others are yet to work out implementation details. The argument that state fiscal deficits are usually understated by unrealistic assumptions on their revenues may not apply when we have evidence to expect high revenue buoyancy for both the direct and indirect taxes in the country. Thus, the developments on this front so far do not suggest a serious threat to inflation on account of fiscal slippage.

42. On the other hand, capacity utilisation has been consistently below 75 per cent now for a long time. The industrial outlook survey and household expectations survey by the RBI do not paint a rosy picture of the economy. The manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) has declined to a contraction zone in July 2017. Rupee has continually appreciated and exports are not doing well. Investment demand is not picking up. Simultaneously, several major reforms including GST have started enhancing the efficiency of the system and raising revenue buoyancy enabling the governments to spend more on capacity creating projects and schemes. This is likely to result in raising potential output and its growth. All these observations point not only to the existence but expansion of negative output gap in the economy. It is important to note that output gap in this context is the difference between the level of realised output and the level of potential output, which would have a direct bearing on the inflation rate. Difference between actual growth and potential growth rates to measure the output gap in this context is a misconception and can be misleading for the policy purposes because higher actual growth than the potential growth need not necessarily result in a positive output gap or even in narrowing the negative output gap. With this clarity and all above observations on the output front, expanding negative output gap in India cannot be wished away, but needs immediate aggressive policy action to correct it. Persistence of negative output gap imposes severe social costs on the economy that is largely borne by the poor and the unemployed.

43. The basic purpose of Flexible Inflation Targeting framework according to me is to move away consciously from the Activist Discretion-based policy to Rule-based policy. As I had argued in the June 7, 2017 meeting of MPC, with a year ahead inflation forecast now brought down to 4 per cent by the RBI and existence of expanding negative output gap, any rule-based policy would suggest a cut in the policy rate by at least 50 basis points. My forecasts and arguments above suggest space for even higher cut. However, exercising caution and waiting for further vindication of my stand and forecasts by data and facts, I vote for a cut of 50 basis points in the policy rate at this stage. In my opinion, the neutral policy stance needs to be seriously reconsidered in favour of the accommodative stance given the above arguments.