32. Retail inflation has softened, touching a new low of 1.5 per cent in June 2017, slowing mainly due to a favourable base effect, falling food prices, and decline in international prices of fuel, as well as contraction in inflation excluding food and fuel. Going forward, as base effects fade, some upside risks to inflation remain, including rising pressures on the price of food (especially vegetables and animal proteins), inflationary effects from implementation of farm loan waivers, and the possible rise in inflation due to implementation of house rent allowances under the 7th Central Pay Commission. At the same time, some upside risks to inflation have either decreased or not materialised, counterbalancing the inflationary pressures. These include a normal monsoon, along with effective supply management, smooth roll-out of the GST, continuation of moderation in inflation excluding food and fuel, and expectation of stable international commodity prices. However, continuous monitoring of incoming data is required to ascertain the extent to which the recent softening is durable.

33. On the growth front, the agricultural sector is expected to perform strongly on account of a normal monsoon for the second successive year and well-timed sowing for the kharif season. This is expected to further boost rural consumption, as evidenced by the growth in consumer non-durables. At the same time, industrial growth remains subdued on the back of sluggish demand and a consequent build-up of inventories reflected in contraction in consumer durables and capital goods. The twin problems of weak capex cycle and debt overhang have constrained the private sector from undertaking new investment. Infrastructure bottlenecks are also a major constraint, while the government’s plan for housing to all may provide an impetus to growth.

34. Moving on to forward looking indices that predict future economic activity, growth in the Indian Leading Index (constructed by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, with which the author is affiliated) is falling, as is Indian Leading Exports Index growth. These are indicative of a fading economic growth outlook, as well as a pessimistic outlook with respect to exports growth. The latter is reinforced by movements in ECRI’s leading indices for the global economy that suggest that international economic growth is about as good as it gets, and could start easing in the months ahead. Furthermore, consistent with the cyclical downturns in ECRI’s international future inflation gauges (predictors of inflation), there are already concerted inflation cycle downturns starting in most major economies.

35. There is thus room for a policy repo rate cut by 25 basis points.