30. Inflation as measured by the CPI recorded an uptick since the previous meeting of the MPC in early October 2017. This rise was driven by higher food inflation (mainly vegetables and fruits) and fuel prices. The effect of an increase in House Rent Allowance and the lingering impact of the goods and services tax (GST) also contributed towards the pressure on inflation. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel remained steady at 4.6 per cent.

31. Going forward, upside risks include expectations of high international prices of crude oil due to OPEC’s accord to extend production cuts till December 2018. The impact of House Rent Allowance and likely fiscal slippages may also continue to push inflation up. The seasonal decline in vegetable prices (especially onions and tomatoes) has also not yet materialised due to supply disruptions. Global financial instability on account of monetary policy normalisation in advanced economies also implies risks to inflation. Further, the latest round of RBI’s Households Inflation Expectations Survey shows inflation expectations firming up for both three-month- and one-year-ahead horizons. The Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey shows that firms expect to pass on the increase in input prices to output prices. Offsetting factors include the reduction in GST rate of several commodities and services that may translate into lower retail prices for consumers, a more proactive supply management by the government, and a downward trend in prices of pulses.

32. India’s GVA growth accelerated in Q2 2017-18 after five consecutive quarters of slowing down. Although agriculture and services decelerated, there was a rebound in industrial activity, partly due to restocking after GST implementation.

33. Going forward, the Reserve Bank’s surveys indicate that performance in the services and infrastructure sectors is expected to improve in Q4 on account of increase in demand, financial conditions and the overall business situation. Further, recapitalization of public sector banks may help in sustaining the renewed credit flows. The recent reduction in GST rates may also provide a boost to the economy. The improvement in the ranking related to the ease of doing business may also provide an impetus to growth. In the coming months, downside risks to growth may arise from lower than projected sowing in the rabi season. Another major factor may be the recent increase in oil prices that will put pressure on margins of firms. The Consumer Confidence Survey conducted by RBI indicates deterioration in the outlook for the general economic situation and the employment scenario.

34. Furthermore, growth in the Economic Cycle Research Institute’s Indian Leading Index, a predictor of future economic activity, has been lacklustre in recent months.

35. Thus, in the current scenario, a wait and watch strategy is recommended, with continuous monitoring of data. Hence, I vote for status quo in the policy rate and maintenance of the neutral stance.