48. Since the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met last in June 2018, inflation prints have been somewhat softer than the Reserve Bank’s projections. Notably, vegetables and fruits prices have surprised on the downside. However, the underlying inflation as reflected in “ex food fuel” segment, especially in petrol and diesel, transportation (including fares), education fees, health services and clothing persists, and does not augur well for headline inflation going forward.

49. The last three rounds of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)’s Inflation Expectations Survey (IES) of households reflect hardening of the 3-month ahead and 12-month ahead inflation expectations by 110 basis points (bps) and 150 bps, respectively. The input cost pressures faced by the corporate sector are also reported to be robust. These outcomes are not surprising given that headline inflation – even after adjusting for the statistical effect of the Centre’s increase in house rent allowances (HRA) – has remained above 4%, the MPC’s mandated target headline inflation rate, for seven out of the past eight months, with a mean as well as median of slightly over 4.5%.

50. Benign food inflation continues to act as a factor pulling forecasts down. It remains to be seen if the usual summer seasonal pickup in food inflation will simply be delayed by a month or two, or it is a feature of supply-driven soft food inflation prints. However, the major upside risk to food inflation that MPC had highlighted in its past resolutions, viz., the award of minimum support prices (MSPs), has materialised. There is now a concrete announcement detailing the targeted kharif crops and a much higher than the normal MSP increase. Though significant uncertainty remains regarding the exact rollout of the MSP program, inflation projections by the Reserve Bank include the impact of MSP under reasonable procurement assumptions.

51. Oil prices have moderated somewhat compared with two months back due to an increase in supply from some of the OPEC countries and Russia. Nevertheless, the price of the Indian crude basket remains at elevated levels and is just a throw away from levels that can cause domestic inflation to rise sharply. Hence, while the supply response has had some softening impact on the projections, oil price gyrations remain an important risk going forward.

52. Factoring in these considerations, I am more concerned about upside risks materialising compared to downside risks. This is especially so as most real-time indicators suggest that growth recovery is likely to be sustainable. As I have mentioned in the past few minutes, estimates suggest that the output gap has more or less closed.

53. In summary, since past several headline inflation prints have been above the target and projections suggest this will also be the case over the medium term, I vote to raise the policy rate by 25 basis points (bps) as a step towards fulfilling our inflation targeting mandate while paying attention to growth. The rate hike of June followed by another rate hike will help rein in demand pressures and manage inflation expectations. However, this transmission will occur with a lag. Since that is somewhat far and there is an important interim uncertainty in the form of tariff wars which can rock global growth, financial markets and inflation in abrupt and unexpected ways, I vote to retain the neutral stance of monetary policy.