54. Headline inflation prints since last policy have been significantly above the target. While a part of this is statistical due to the Centre's HRA implementation, there has also been a rise in inflation sans HRA. A major concern has been the steep rise in oil prices coincidentally with (i) global rates and commodity cycles having turned up; and (ii) our fiscal deficit having overshot for this year and likely to do so next year too. Hence, even without factoring in the States’ staggered HRA implementation and MSP rises announced in the Union Budget, risks to inflation seem clearly tilted on the upside. Indeed, RBI's projections at 12-14 months in future put headline inflation by more than 50 basis points above the target (by then the statistical effect of Centre’s HRA implementation would have completely waned).

55. Such an inflation scenario would imply a raise in policy rates by a pure inflation-targeting central bank, in turn, implying a change in stance from "neutral" to "withdrawal of accommodation." However, two reasons induced me to pause.

56. First, an important factor determining inflation going forward is likely to be the shale gas production response to rising oil prices; while this response has been somewhat muted, its trigger out of dormancy could dampen oil prices swiftly. I would like to see whether this downside risk plays out in next few months to have a firmer grip on the medium-term inflation trajectory.

57. Second, for a flexible inflation targeting framework, the growth trajectory relative to potential output has to be considered too.

58. On this front, the output gap remains somewhat negative though it has been steadily closing. Structurally, the improving balance sheets of the banking system post recapitalisation package and the ongoing resolution of large stressed accounts have made the recent pick up in credit growth more sustainable. Real economic activity indicators also suggest a broad-based growth revival. While RBI growth projections for next year are in line with this buoyant activity of late, the recovery is nevertheless nascent and worthy of some support in the short run.

59. Given these trade-offs, I vote for a pause with no change in the neutral stance. The next few months of inflation and growth data will be key to determining the evolution of policy rates. If growth remains robust and inflation prints continue to project headline inflation a year ahead well above the target, then a change in stance from "neutral" to "withdrawal of accommodation" might have to be considered.

60. In the meantime, it would be good to focus on (i) pushing forward the work we have undertaken in improving the transmission of policy rate changes to the real sector; and (ii) taking the resolution framework for stressed assets to its logical conclusion.