54. Inflation as measured by CPI ex HRA has risen for the third consecutive month in June 2018, driven by a broad-based increase in inflation in non-food goods and services. Continuing elevated crude oil prices have kept retail prices of petroleum products high; this has also resulted in higher inflation in transport services. Furthermore, inflation increased in education, health and clothing. In contrast, inflation in the food group remained benign due to a decline in prices of fruits and lower than the usual seasonal uptick in prices of vegetables. On the whole, actual inflation outcomes since the last MPC resolution of June 2018 have been slightly below the projected trajectory as food inflation has continued to surprise on the downside.

55. Going forward, excluding the HRA impact, CPI inflation is projected at 4.7-4.8 per cent in H2:2018-19; and 5 per cent in Q1:2019-20. These projections include the impact of an increase in minimum support prices (MSPs) for kharif crops announced by the central government over what was already assumed in projections in the June policy. The outlook for inflation, however, is faced with both upside and downside risks such as (i) considerable uncertainty around the full impact of MSP changes on inflation, which will be known only in the coming months when the procurement details are available and execution takes place; (ii) susceptibility of crude oil to both supply and demand shocks; (iii) continuing volatility in financial markets; (iv) a further rise in inflation expectations of households which has the potential to feed into wage & salary increases and induce cost-push pressures; (v) fiscal slippage at the centre and/or state levels; and (vi) second round effects on inflation on account of the staggered HRA revisions by various state governments, though the direct statistical impact of HRA revisions will be looked through.

56. Domestic growth impulses continue to be reasonably strong. The normal monsoon so far augurs well for the farm sector. Investment activity has remained broadly positive. The manufacturing sector has continued to be robust. Several high frequency indicators of services activity have expanded at a faster pace in recent months. However, rising trade protectionism may impact domestic investment and growth prospects by dampening India’s exports. Overall, economic activity appears to be buoyant with GDP growth for 2018-19 projected at 7.4 per cent, same as in the June policy; and 7.5 per cent for Q1:2019-20.

57. As inflation risks have continued to be elevated, I vote for an increase in the policy repo rate by 25 basis points; this action is a necessary step towards securing the mandated 4 per cent inflation target on a durable basis. However, in view of several uncertainties that are present, I maintain the neutral stance of monetary policy.