43. The headline inflation in January and February 2018 showed a sharper decline than what MPC had expected in its previous meeting. It is likely to show a lower print even during March 2018. From April 2018, however, it is expected to increase on account of unfavorable base effect for the next 3-4 months before it again starts declining to reach the level of around 4 per cent by March 2019. Thus, in the baseline scenario, we are likely to be at or around the target rate of headline inflation 12 months down. There are, however, several uncertainties and concerns surrounding this forecast. These are:

There is a revival of economic growth but not to the level expected by RBI. Although the capacity utilization has improved to around 74 per cent, I feel, it is still far below the threshold required to induce substantial fresh investment. There is hardly any evidence on employment growth picking up to a level that would put upward pressure on the wage growth. Thus, continued existence of a negative output gap has to be considered.

Fears of a trade war among major global players are turning increasingly realistic with likely adverse impact on our exports and costs of production. It may severely affect our growth recovery over the coming year.

Oil prices have been fluctuating and both their direction and magnitude are difficult to predict for any possible impact on the headline inflation during the coming year.

Concerns about the adequacy of monsoon rains and implementation of the revision in minimum support prices of different crops add another dimension to the inflation uncertainties.

Implementation of the revisions in HRA for employees of different states and related organizations (like universities, research institutes, municipal bodies, etc.) in line with the 7th CPC could raise the headline inflation substantially over time. Although it has to be seen through because it would be only statistical, it does impact CPI as well as CPI excluding food and fuel significantly for about a year. And if the implementation is staggered among states, it would take even longer. In this context, it is argued that the second round effects of such an increase have to be considered. My research shows that inflation dynamics have changed during the current decade making the second round effects less relevant.

Slippage by the Centre from the fiscal consolidation path and its likely adverse impact on the headline inflation and the cost of borrowing are often raised as a major concern. In this context, as I had pointed out in the last MPC minutes, it is the combined (Centre and all States together) fiscal deficit that matters for the headline inflation. By now, 26 states have presented their budgets and their combined budgeted fiscal deficit is estimated to be 2.6 per cent of GDP. Thus, to a large extent, the fiscal slippage of the Centre is compensated by the fiscal discipline shown by the States. The net impact on the headline inflation on this count, therefore, is likely to be very limited. Moreover, there are expectations about the tax revenues exceeding the revised estimates for the year 2017-18, reducing the estimate of the fiscal slippage by the Centre. If the same buoyancy continues, it can substantially reduce the magnitude of the fiscal slippage next year. On the other hand, the slippage can occur for various reasons including the forthcoming elections in States and the Centre.

The Business Inflation Expectations Survey (BIES) conducted by the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) during February 2018 shows that the expected headline inflation (CPI) 12 months down by the businesses is 4.1 per cent but is increasing of late. Similarly, the RBI survey of household inflation expectations also shows increasing trend.

44. On account of all such uncertainties of impacts on headline inflation in both the directions, it is prudent to wait and watch the events play out before any decisive change in policy stance and/or rate can be considered. I, therefore, vote for maintaining a status quo on the policy rate and neutral stance.