32. Headline inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, rose to 5% in June 2018 from 4.9% in May due to a broad-based rise across its sub-indices. The pass-through of elevated global oil prices in the domestic economy directly affected prices of LPG, petroleum products and transport services. Inflation in education and health also increased modestly. Food inflation, however, declined marginally between May and June, partly due to a favourable base effect and also because of a decline in prices of fruits and soft inflation in vegetables. Inflation excluding food and fuel hovered above 6% and is a cause for concern. Moreover, high input costs and selling prices were reflected in the Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) for the first quarter of 2018-19. Companies covered in the Services PMI in June also highlighted high input costs as did those polled for the Manufacturing PMI in July.

33. Going forward, several upside risks to inflation remain. First, a larger than average increase in the minimum support prices (MSPs) for all kharif crops for the sowing season of 2018-19 is likely to have a direct impact on inflation in the food group as well as secondary effects through greater purchasing power in rural areas. However, the extent of impact will depend on the nature and scope of implementation of procurement by the government. The tapering impact of HRA revisions for central government employees and the staggered impact of HRA revisions by state governments may also push headline inflation up. Further, crude oil prices remain above $70 and future movements are expected to be volatile, depending on geopolitical events and their impact on global demand. Volatility in global financial markets also continues to impart uncertainty to the inflation outlook. Additionally, fiscal slippages by governments may have adverse implications for market volatility, and may crowd out private investment and impact the outlook for inflation. Moreover, the June round of RBI’s survey of households shows an increase in inflation expectations at the three-month and one-year horizons. Elevated input costs also pose a risk for further inflation in the coming months, although there is some potential for easing due to softening global commodity prices. Downside risks also include a normal southwest monsoon, which should help contain food inflation in the medium-term. Additionally, reduction in Goods and Services Tax (GST) rates may cool down inflation to the extent of a pass-through of reduced GST rates to retail consumers.

34. The use-based classification of the index of industrial production (IIP) shows that industrial growth has strengthened in recent months on account of growth in capital goods and consumer durables. Central government schemes concerning building of highways and rural housing have contributed towards acceleration of growth in the infrastructure and construction sectors. While the July manufacturing PMI remained in expansion mode, it eased relative to the previous month. The business expectations index (BEI) of RBI for Q1:2018-19 remained in optimistic zone. Further, the Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey suggests that manufacturing sector activity is expected to remain robust in Q2. According to the June Round of the Consumer Confidence Survey conducted by the Reserve Bank of India, the Current Situation Index, an indicator of the current state of the economy, rose modestly after dropping in the previous two rounds. This rise was largely driven by an improvement in sentiment on the general economic situation and employment scenario as well as an increase in spending.

35. At the same time, the Future Expectations Index that depicts consumer outlook fell marginally in the June round. This was driven by a slight drop in sentiments on the one-year ahead general economic situation and the deterioration in the outlook on income. Downside risks to growth also include rising trade tensions that may hamper demand for India’s exports, aggravating the cyclical slowdown in exports signalled by the continued downswing in the growth rate of the Indian Leading Exports Index maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York. This is consistent with the global economic slowdown predicted earlier by ECRI's international leading indexes.

36. Thus, with hardening of actual inflation, rising inflation expectations along with prevailing upside risks to inflation, I vote for an increase in the repo rate by 25 basis points while retaining the neutral stance.