47. In its third bi-monthly resolution of August, the MPC had expected inflation to ease in the second quarter of 2018-19 and had brought down its forecast for that quarter by 30 basis points relative to the projection in June. In my minutes in August, I anticipated the soft inflation readings that came in for July and August: “The forecast – the intermediate target that provides a proximate view of how the goal variables are forming – suggests that inflation is likely to encounter a soft patch in the second quarter, but it will resume an upward trajectory in the second half of the year.” I also warned that “the softer inflation prints expected in Q2 could likely lull inflation expectations, but abundant precaution and decisiveness in quelling risks to the target is warranted if the hard-earned gains in terms of macroeconomic stability and credibility have to be preserved.”

48. Thus, the projections turned out to be directionally correct, although they overestimated the levels of inflation in these months.

49. In view of the reasonable reliability of the forecasts in terms of direction, inflation appears to have troughed and is projected to rise from September, exceeding the target from the fourth quarter of 2018-19 and the first quarter of 2019-20 in an environment suffused with upside risks. Disconcertingly, global risks to inflation from crude prices and financial market turbulence are materialising on an ongoing basis. Corporate finances suggest that it is only a matter of time before firms pass through heightened input costs more aggressively into selling prices. Food inflation is imparting a downside under the influence of a deep cyclical downswing in the prices of some constituents and irregular downturns in others.

50. Meanwhile, aggregate domestic demand, as measured by GDP growth, appears to have quickened on to a higher trajectory (8 per cent) during January-June 2018. Slack has been pulled in and capacity utilisation is getting stretched. Rural and urban spend is strengthening to a point where aggregate demand, especially private consumption, is likely running ahead of the supply response, even as the outlook for agriculture, manufacturing and construction is brightening and a gradual upturn is taking hold in various services sectors.

51. The evolving macroeconomic configuration warrants an appropriate policy response. With the downward level shift in the projections relative to the August resolution, especially during January-June 2019, it is reasonable to keep the policy rate on hold in this meeting and to monitor the cumulative 50 basis points increase in June and August as it works its way through the economy. Stakeholders are anticipating this transmission – households have lowered their expectations of one year ahead inflation, while professional forecasters have revised downwards their outer forecasts of headline inflation. Yet, inflation is set to rise over the period ahead in an environment in which the balance of risks is shifting to the upside. Monetary policy needs to move to high alert, and this needs to be reflected in a pro-active policy stance. Overarchingly, monetary policy needs to stay focused on its mandate – the target of 4 per cent inflation, while keeping in mind the objective of growth – within the RBI’s overall policy framework that assigns appropriate instruments to goals in order to secure efficient policy outcomes.

52. I vote for status quo on the policy rate and a change in stance to “calibrated tightening”.