62. Headline inflation moderated significantly to 3.3 per cent in October from 3.7 per cent in August. Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of HRA for central government employees also softened to 3.1 per cent in October from 3.4 per cent in August 2018. Food inflation continued to surprise on the downside; widening of deflation in pulses, vegetables, and sugar, along with broad-based moderation in other food items moved the food group into deflation. Inflation in fuel remained elevated, reflecting a rise in international prices of liquefied petroleum gas and calibrated increase in domestic administered prices of kerosene. Inflation in items other than food and fuel rose sharply (to more than 6 per cent) on account of transport and communication, health, household goods and services and personal care and effects. On the whole, actual CPI inflation prints, especially in October, turned out to be markedly lower than the projections set out in the October policy.

63. Going forward, inflation is projected at 2.7-3.2 per cent in H2:2018-19 and 3.8-4.2 per cent in H1:2019-20, with risks tilted to the upside. Adjusted for the HRA impact also, the above projections remain unchanged as the impact will fade away completely in December. Though inflation projections have been revised downwards, several uncertainties continue to cloud the outlook in the form of : (i) the risk of a sudden reversal of the unusually low food prices; (ii) continuing uncertainty about the exact impact of MSP on food inflation; (iii) uncertainty of the oil price trajectory; (iv) volatile financial markets; (v) elevated inflation expectations; (vi) the likely staggered impact of HRA revisions by state governments; the direct statistical impact of HRA will be looked through while being mindful of the second-round effects; and (vii) the risk of fiscal slippages at the centre and/or state levels. With the general government (centre plus states) fiscal deficit budgeted at about 6 per cent of GDP in 2018-19, the extant national fiscal stance continues to be more akin to a “shock amplifier” rather than a “shock absorber” for our macroeconomy.

64. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth decelerated to 7.1 per cent in Q2:2018-19, after four consecutive quarters of acceleration, driven mainly by a slowdown in private consumption. A sharper growth of imports relative to exports resulted in net exports pulling down aggregate demand. However, gross fixed capital formation expanded by double-digits for the third consecutive quarter. On the supply side, growth in manufacturing decelerated due to lower profitability of manufacturing firms. Low precipitation level during the north-east monsoon – 49 per cent below the long period average – may have negative impact on activity in the farm sector. However, on the positive side, the decline in crude oil prices could boost India’s growth prospects. Increased capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector also augurs well for investment activity, especially because bank credit growth has continued to accelerate. Based on an overall assessment, GDP growth for 2018-19 has been projected at 7.4 per cent (7.2-7.3 per cent in H2) as in the October policy, and for H1:2019-20 at 7.5 per cent, with risks somewhat to the downside. All things considered, the time is apposite to further strengthen domestic macroeconomic fundamentals; fiscal discipline is critical to create space for and crowd in private investment activity.

65. Although the inflation trajectory has been revised downwards, several uncertainties persist, especially about the medium-term outlook of food inflation and oil prices. Incoming data should help clear the haziness and enable better assessment of the inflation outlook, especially regarding the permanence of the current softness in inflation prints. Hence, I vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged and retaining the stance of monetary policy as “calibrated tightening”. Should upside risks, as outlined above, not materialise on a durable basis in the coming months, there is possibility of space opening up for policy action in due course.