37. Headline inflation softened to 3.3 per cent in October from 3.7 per cent in September, primarily due to the drop in food inflation from 1 per cent in September to -0.1 per cent in October. Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of an increase in house rent allowance (HRA) of central government employees (as per RBI’s estimates) also moderated from 3.5 per cent in September to 3.1 per cent in October, while CPI excluding food and fuel adjusted for the impact of an increase in HRA increased from 5.3 per cent in September to 5.9 per cent in October. At the same time, various surveys provide mixed signals regarding inflation expectations. Inflation expectations from the November round of the Reserve Bank’s Survey of Households softened by 40 basis points for three-month ahead expectations vis-à-vis the last round but did not change for one-year ahead expectations. The Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey indicates moderation in input prices in the third quarter of 2018-19 as reported by manufacturing firms.

38. Looking forward, downside risks to the inflation outlook include continuing moderation in food inflation and a sharp fall in crude oil prices. At the same time, the slowdown in global growth may also lead to softening of crude oil prices. On the flip side, there is also the possibility of a rebound in crude oil prices due to supply factors. Additionally, fiscal slippages by the government may have adverse implications for market volatility and impact the outlook for inflation. Upside risks associated with an increase in minimum support prices (MSPs) still persist. Risks due to an increase in state level HRAs and input prices also prevail. Thus, there is considerable uncertainty with respect to the inflation outlook and movements in both food inflation and crude oil prices have to be watched closely.

39. On the output side, GDP growth in the second quarter of 2018-19 slowed to 7.1 per cent from 8.2 per cent in the previous quarter. Private consumption growth moderated possibly due to easing in rural demand that may have resulted from depressed farm prices and sluggish rural wage growth although investment growth was strong partly due to government spending in infrastructure projects. At the same time, the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing rose to an eleven-month high in November reflecting an expansion in output, and orders (domestic and exports). PMI for services also rose due to new businesses. Forward looking indicators such as RBI’s Business Expectations Index for the manufacturing sector signal an improvement in the fourth quarter based on upbeat sentiments on production, order books, exports and capacity utilisation. Meanwhile, growth in the Indian Leading Index, a predictor of the direction of Indian economic growth maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, has risen lately, indicating some improvement in economic growth prospects.

40. Downside risks to growth include lower sowing in the rabi season, financial volatility, global slowdown and trade war, while the drop in crude oil prices and rise in credit offtake augur well for growth prospects. As of now, net exports are a drag with growth in imports sharper relative to exports growth. However, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Export Index, a predictor of the direction of exports growth, has ticked up lately, indicating a slightly brighter Indian export growth outlook, despite languishing growth in ECRI’s 20-country composite Long Leading Index, which still points to a continued global growth slowdown.

41. In sum, while inflation has softened, upside risks to inflation remain. It is therefore best to pause and wait for incoming data while maintaining a vigil on inflation, especially with respect to food and crude oil. I therefore vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged. At the same time, given the uncertainty with respect to the inflation outlook, I also vote for maintaining the stance of calibrated tightening.