38. Headline inflation eased to 4.4% in February after rising to a 17-month high of 5.2% in December, 2017. This fall was largely due to a significant seasonal drop in vegetable prices, along with other components of food. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel remained unchanged in February, having stayed at 5.2% since December, partly due to housing inflation driven by the direct effects of house rent allowance for government employees under the 7th central pay commission.

39. Despite the recent fall in headline inflation, several upside risks prevail. The proposed link between the minimum support prices (MSPs) for kharif crops with 1.5 times the cost of production may drive inflation up. Fiscal deficit slippage and the slower than expected fiscal consolidation, as well as the staggered impact of house rent allowance by state governments, may also exert pressure on inflation. The recent volatility in crude prices has also resulted in uncertainty regarding the inflation scenario. Further, the proposed increase in customs duty is likely to increase inflation. The outlook for inflation as per RBI’s survey of households undertaken in March 2018 signals high inflation expectations for both three-month-ahead and one-year-ahead horizons. Further, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) of the RBI suggests hardening of input prices, which may be passed on to consumers and lead to higher CPI inflation.

40. On the output front, the estimated GDP growth is 6.6% for 2017-18, lower than 7.1% for 2016-17. Nevertheless, some positive signs of economic growth are visible, especially in revival of investment. Implementation of GST is stabilising and the recapitalization of public sector banks, as well as the steps towards NPA resolution under the insolvency and bankruptcy code, are expected to contribute to economic growth. On the other hand, banking sector risks can be an impediment to sustainable growth. Separately, the possibility of an escalating trade war is a growing risk factor.

41. Moreover, the Consumer Confidence Survey conducted by RBI in March 2018 presents a pessimistic outlook for General Economic Situation and Employment Scenario. This is supported by the languishing growth in the Economic Cycle Research Institute’s (ECRI) Indian Leading Index, a harbinger of future economic activity, indicating dull prospects for economic growth. Further, growth in ECRI’s 20-country composite Long Leading Index has eased, suggesting that global growth is likely to slow down. This has impacted growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Exports Index, a predictor of the direction of exports growth, which is subdued, indicating that Indian export growth outlook remains restrained. Dimming growth prospects at the global level are also indicated in the drop in the composite Purchasing Managers’ Indexes covering services and manufacturing for various economies, including the Euro area, the U.K., China and Japan, since the end of 2017, and more recently in the U.S.

42. Thus, with upside risks to inflation and lacklustre growth prospects, a wait and watch strategy with respect to evolving risks, along with status quo in interest rates, is currently recommended.