61. Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of HRA for central government employees moderated significantly from 4.6 per cent in June 2018 to 3.8 per cent in July and further to 3.4 per cent in August, reversing the trend of previous three months. Food inflation continued to surprise on the downside, declining sharply from 3.1 per cent in June to 0.9 per cent by August in the absence of a seasonal pick up in prices of key vegetables and fruits in summer months. Inflation in items other than food and fuel also moderated due mainly to softening in housing, clothing and transportation. However, inflation in the fuel group increased reflecting higher international petroleum product prices. Overall, actual inflation turnouts in July and August were lower than the projections set out in the August resolution of the MPC.

62. Going forward, excluding the HRA impact, CPI inflation is projected at 3.7 per cent in Q2:2018-19, 3.8-4.5 per cent in H2 and 4.8 per cent in Q1:2019-20. The outlook for inflation continues to face several upside pressures, which include: (i) uncertainty surrounding the impact of the increase in minimum support prices of kharif crops on food inflation; (ii) surge in crude oil prices; (iii) heightened volatility in financial markets of emerging economies; (iv) a further increase in inflation expectations of households at three-month horizon, which when combined with rising input costs, may impact price and wage setting behaviour, though it is comforting that one-year ahead inflation expectations have moderated; (v) the risk of fiscal slippage at the centre and/or state level; and (vi) second round effects on inflation on account of the staggered HRA revisions by various state governments, though the direct statistical impact of HRA revisions will be looked through.

63. The GDP growth print for Q1 of 2018-19 touched a high of 8.2 per cent, driven by robust private consumption and investment activity, suggesting that growth impulses, thus far, continue to be buoyant. The first advance estimates of production of major kharif crops are reassuring, considering spatially and temporally uneven monsoon. Going forward, consumption is expected to be sustained. Though rising oil prices and tightening of financial conditions may have a bearing on investment demand, overall economic activity is expected to be resilient with GDP growth for 2018-19 projected at 7.4 per cent (as in the August resolution). GDP growth for Q1:2019-20 is projected marginally lower at 7.4 per cent vis-à-vis 7.5 per cent in the August resolution.

64. The policy repo rate was raised by 25 basis points each in the last two consecutive meetings of the MPC in June and August. Moderation in inflation in the last two months has lowered the projected inflation trajectory. I vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged. Recognising that inflation risks have been persistent, and to reaffirm the commitment to securing the mandated 4 per cent inflation target on a durable basis, it is apposite to change the stance of monetary policy from “neutral” to “calibrated tightening”. “Calibrated tightening” means that in the current rate cycle, a cut in the policy repo rate is off the table, and we are not obliged to increase the rate at every policy meeting.