45. In the last meeting of the MPC in August 2018, I had clearly mentioned that, if the RBI’s inflation forecast for July and August substantially exceeded the actual reading, its medium term forecast would also have to be revised downward substantially. As expected, this has happened. The RBI forecast for the headline CPI inflation in July and August 2018 turned out to be significantly higher than the actual readings. Similar deviations had occurred even for the RBI’s May and June 2018 headline inflation forecasts. RBI has, therefore, revised its short to medium term forecast of headline inflation significantly downward even after considering revisions in its baseline scenario of higher oil prices and exchange rate. As I had argued in the last meeting, moreover, the household inflationary expectations 12 months ahead have come down (by 30 bps) as per the latest RBI survey. The growth forecast for the Indian economy considering both the latest upside and downside risks has remained the same (7.4 percent) as during the previous meeting of MPC in August 2018 when the MPC decided by a 5-1 majority vote to hike the policy rate pre-emptively by 25 bps. Therefore, now there is no case for any hike in the policy rate this time. This is the time for a pause to allow the consecutive rate hikes to sink in the system and settle down. I, therefore, vote for status quo on both the policy rate and the neutral stance. More specific reasons for my vote are:

While there is a considerable depreciation of Indian Rupee against US Dollar recently, the rate of depreciation is substantially lower in terms of trade weighted Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER), because other currencies have also depreciated against US Dollar. It is the depreciation in NEER that affects headline inflation. As a result, its impact on inflation is not likely to be very substantial.

While the oil price increase has been substantial, the following two aspects need to be explicitly considered for its impact on the headline inflation: (a) it has a lagged effect on inflation depending on its effective pass-through including revisions in domestic taxes; and (b) productivity improvement or revised Input-Output ratios in the oil using productive activities could off-set to a considerable extent the adverse impact of price rise in oil.

The impact of House Rent Allowance (HRA) revisions as per the recommendation of 7th CPC in the central and state public sector enterprises, autonomous bodies, universities and other organizations that provide housing to their employees should ideally be seen through as we have been doing for the central government employees (because it is purely statistical). However, this impact has not been separated due to data problems. Since such households would form a significant proportion of the CSO sample households (almost similar to the one for the central government employees) for estimating housing CPI, there is a considerable overestimation of the effective inflation rate for the headline and more so for the CPI-ex-food and fuel. In short, the effective inflation forecasts for the short to medium term are much less than what RBI considers because of the lack of precise information. There is an urgent need to fix this problem so that right data inputs are considered for policy actions. However, till this statistical problem is fixed, I would not consider marginal upward deviations (of about 20-30 bps) of headline inflation forecast from the targeted 4 percent as a major concern requiring any rate action.

The US economy has almost peaked and is only likely to go down from there. Therefore, further rate hikes in US may not be as attractive to global investors as before. As far as the Indian economy is concerned, the real interest rate is significantly higher than 2 per cent even after considering the inflationary expectation of businesses 12 months ahead of about 4.36 percent as per the latest IIM Ahmedabad survey results for August 2018 or the RBI’s own inflation forecast 12 months ahead. There is no justification for increasing it further by a rate hike at this point.

Finally, the headline inflation forecast 12 months ahead by RBI is on a higher side according to me. This is also because the extent to which RBI has considered the impact of MSP revision on inflation is unrealistically high in my opinion.

46. Considering all these points, status quo in both the neutral stance and policy rate at this point is the best option.