28. Since the last review, there has been a sharp increase in headline inflation (November, 4.9%; December, 5.2%). The latest reading is, worryingly, led by rising inflation in all major groups. Both food and fuel inflation have also increased, with the usual seasonal easing in food inflation getting delayed till December. Global demand – with world GDP projected to grow at approximately 3.9% in 2018 – could push oil prices higher. All measures of inflation have converged above 5%. Adverse supply side shocks could push the Phillips curve of the economy upward posing a strong risk to the medium-term inflation target of 4%.

29. Inflation, excluding food and fuel (December, 5.2%) is up although this is primarily due to the statistical boost from Centre’s HRA. Pricing decisions by firms may possibly be responding more to the recent increases in input costs, driven by a reversal of the international commodity cycle, rather than staff costs, driven by a tightening of the labour market, or higher capacity utilisation. This suggests that inflation excluding food and fuel may be increasing more because of cost-push factors, which will worsen the growth-inflation trade-off.

30. There are fewer mitigating factors to rising inflation compared to two months ago. Rural wage growth continues to be moderate but with an uptick, possibly reflecting a rise in construction activity. The deflation in pulses continues but could reverse with the new procurement policy announced in the Union Budget of 2018-2019. At the current juncture though, stripped of cereals and vegetables (volatile items), the increase in inflation net of volatile items, from its trough in June 2017, is less pronounced. Both 3-month and 1-year ahead inflationary expectations are also stable.

31. In my last review, I had flagged how increases in MSP by the government could lead to generalized inflation, and worsen monetary transmission, based on research (with co-authors). While details on the exact procurement policy are awaited, the enactment of a more elaborate procurement policy in the 2018-2019 Union Budget will put stress on state finances as well. Fiscal slippages in India are inflationary!

32. With respect to economic growth, data trends have largely been positive in the last few months, as suggested by many high frequency indicators. My main concern in the last few reviews was whether animal spirits in the economy will sustain GDP growth beyond the base effect induced increases in Q3 and Q4 2017-2018. This looks increasingly likely.

33. Profit margins in the manufacturing sector are improving, with sales being higher in real terms. The PMI in services increased in December and January. The RBI enterprise surveys also suggest a substantial improvement in demand conditions. Several high frequency activity indicators have picked up suggesting that the growth deceleration has troughed. The flow of financial resources by banks and non-banks is also picking up. It is highly possible however that current growth trends will make the economy accelerate into an inflationary phase. This needs to be watched with laser-like precision.

34. Ultimately, any durable increase in growth in GDP however will depend on investment demand. The figure below, using the KLEMS database, plots growth in output per worker against growth in capital stock per worker between 1980 and 2011. While the figure is merely suggestive, it does indicate that output per worker has tracked capital per worker fairly closely during this period, suggesting dynamics in output per worker in India in the medium term are described reasonably well by a Solow-Swan style model. Any durable increase in output per worker will only come about by increases in capital per worker. To that extent, the recent uptick in investment/GDP ratio is encouraging.


35. Taking these considerations into account, I vote for a pause in the policy repo rate at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.