45. I vote for status quo on the policy repo rate and for maintaining the stance of calibrated tightening.

46. In its October 2018 meeting, the MPC anticipated the softening of headline inflation in the months ahead, revising its forecast down by 90 basis points in Q3: 2018-19 and by 30 basis points in Q4, and this sentiment was also reflected in individual minutes. The actual outturns for September and October undershot even the revised projections substantially, with prices of food unexpectedly sinking into deflation. In my view, the Indian economy is experiencing the onset of positive supply shocks as reflected in the sizable easing of prices of food and petroleum products, which could reverse. Accordingly, they should be looked through, while remaining alert to spillovers to the rest of inflation which is already elevated and rising. Households have ignored this unusual softening of inflation prints and have kept their 12-months ahead expectations unchanged, while professional forecasters have projected inflation to rise to 4.5-4.6 per cent in the first half of 2019-20. Consumers remain pessimistic about the price situation, citing it as the main factor influencing their perceptions of worsening general economic conditions. Corporates assess that input cost pressures will remain firm. Based on current reckoning, the MPC projects inflation to rise above the target in the first half of 2019-20. Taking these factors into account, I reiterate that although softer inflation prints could likely lull inflation expectations, abundant precaution and decisiveness in quelling risks to the target are warranted if the hard-earned gains in terms of macroeconomic stability and credibility are to be preserved.

47. Turning to growth, the CSO’s GDP estimates for Q2:2018-19 show a sequential moderation, but this needs to be caveated by the base effect driven bump in the previous quarter; on a year-on-year basis, though, there has been a marked acceleration in aggregate demand in the first half of 2018-19 and two main engines – investment and exports – are firing. Lead/coincident indicators for Q3 – order books; capacity utilisation in manufacturing; non-food credit growth; capital goods imports; railway and port freight traffic; construction activity – all point to the momentum of growth being sustained. Annual real GDP growth will likely accelerate in 2018-19 from its level a year ago. On the production side, the momentum of activity would be underpinned by buoyancy in manufacturing and some improvement in services sector performance.

48. With average inflation gradually converging to target, these growth impulses can be maintained by ensuring that the expansion remains sustainable. It is in this context that my preference is for keeping the policy rate unchanged. With inflation projected to rise above 4 per cent over the 12-month ahead horizon, it is apposite to persevere with the stance of calibrated tightening to head off inflation pressures from potentially corroding the foundations of the growth path that is evolving over the medium-term.