29. My main concern in the last few reviews has been whether the ongoing cyclical recovery in growth will sustain, despite growing discomfort on the upside risks to the 4% inflation target in the medium-term.

30. The broad-based turnaround in growth continues to gather strength, although the turnaround is benefitting from a favourable base. Demand conditions improved in Q3 (2017-2018). Capacity utilization, which tracks investment trends, has started to improve and is at the highest level now (at 74.3%) since Q2 2014-2015. Three-month average IIP growth (Nov 2017-Jan 2018) is 7.8% y-o-y; what is encouraging is that the high IIP growth is due to sequential gains and not base effects. Profitability in non-IT services has turned around. The sequential gains in the manufacturing sector are strong with the PMI-Manufacturing in expansion zone for the past 8 months. Credit growth continues to pick up, after lagging behind nominal GDP growth in the last two years. There is a risk that recent fraud in a public sector bank may make banks risk averse and slow lending.

31. Overall, growth signals are strong. Most indicators of the output gap suggest that it is closing. While consumption continues to be robust, investment is accelerating.

32. Food inflation continues to impart volatility to headline inflation and drive headline inflation momentum. Lower food inflation at 3.4% in February compared to 4.6% in January was the main driver of lower headline inflation (4.4%) in February. Inflation in vegetables is still elevated due to the adverse base in 2016-2017. Fuel inflation (at 6.8%) is much higher than all the other components. There was a marginal uptick in the 1-year ahead inflation expectations compared to the last round of the survey. Elevated and persistent inflation excluding food, fuel, and HRA adjustments is somewhat worrying. There is however a sustained moderation in cereals inflation, which is unusual. The total availability of pulses also appears to be well above demand estimates.

33. More than the cyclical drivers of food inflation, which for most items tends to be mean reverting, what worries me are the upside structural risks to inflation that impinge on the durability of the 4% inflation target in the medium term. In the past few reviews, I have flagged four such risks: (i) increases in minimum support prices (MSP), (ii) staggered implementation of the pay commission award by the States, (iii) slippages in the fiscal deficit in an election year, (iv) a sustaining of the price of oil at a high level.

34. Of these, my main concern at the current juncture is the possible simultaneous occurrence of adverse twin terms of trade shocks: internal (via a substantial upward revision of minimum support prices which would raise the relative prices of agricultural goods) and external (the price of oil sustains at a high level). Such twin terms of trade shocks would complicate inflation management and worsen the growth-inflation trade-off.

35. While details on what form the MSP policy will take are still awaited, my own research with co-authors shows that a one standard deviation net procurement shock not only increases inflation across all sectors, but after inflation rises for two quarters on impact, it remains positive for about six to seven quarters after that. As in an external terms of trade shock, which would push the Phillips curve of the economy upwards, compromising GDP growth and raising inflation in the medium term, an internal terms of trade shock via a rise in the MSP would do the same. The response to changes in the MSP would therefore need to be pursued in a systematic way to maintain durability of the medium-term 4% inflation target.

36. At this juncture, I would prefer to wait and watch as the data evolves.

37. I vote for a pause in the policy repo rate at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.