29. In the October policy, I had highlighted the primacy of keeping inflationary expectations anchored – whether formed rationally or adaptively – durably at the 4% target. While the one-year ahead median inflationary expectations remained unchanged at 9.8% in the latest round, the three-month median inflationary expectations declined by 40 bps to 9%. The decline in the three-month inflationary expectations number, but unchanged one-year ahead expectations number probably indicates that households don’t expect the current decline in inflation to last. Notwithstanding this, these numbers bring some comfort.

30. In the October policy, I had also mentioned that two interlaced variables pose the potential of un-anchoring inflationary expectations, and thereby making it difficult to ensure price stability on an enduring basis: the nominal depreciation of the Rupee, and the increase in the price of oil. Since October, there was a substantial, though unanticipated, reversal in the price of oil, and by December, it was lower by over 29% compared to its October peak. There was also a strengthening of the Rupee by close to 4.6% (Dec 4 over Oct 5). Food inflation also fell to -0.1% in October. If oil and food prices stay lower for longer, this will help inflationary expectations taper. However, given the buoyancy in oil, and the risks of imported inflation from movements in the exchange rate, both variables need to be carefully watched.

31. The evolution of MSP-inflation dynamics also needs to be carefully watched, although this risk to inflation projections appears mitigated compared to a few months ago.

32. The elevated level of inflation excluding food and fuel (6.1%) at a 3-month high continues to be problematic. Most sub-groups of inflation excluding food and fuel, other than clothing and footwear, have registered upticks. The reversal in inflation excluding food and fuel needs to be carefully watched.

33. Since the last review, overall demand conditions in the manufacturing sector have continued to remain steady. Capacity utilization in Q2 crossed its long-term average (74.9%) and is expected to gather pace going forward. The sustained acceleration in investment activity is encouraging, and this will support rising capex and a higher investment/GDP ratio. There is an improvement in the overall business situation, as tracked by the BEI for manufacturing. Both leading and coincident economic indicators for Q3 growth look good at the current juncture. Organized sector nominal wage growth continues to be high suggesting input cost pressures.

34. Consumer confidence however worsened compared to the previous round suggesting pessimism about the present. Private final consumption expenditure growth momentum also fell in Q2. Merchandise export growth in Q2 however improved relative to Q1, although on the external front, the potential for escalation of tariffs or trade tensions may slow down global growth more than expected.

35. With both the inflation and growth numbers having developed “soft-spots”, the appropriate risk-management approach at the current juncture would be to “wait and watch.” This will allow the MPC to see how various risks to both inflation and growth evolve, and better assess the ability of flexible inflation targeting to absorb the impact of shocks that the economy is currently experiencing.

36. I therefore vote to keep the policy rate unchanged. I vote to keep the stance as calibrated tightening.