53. Since the August policy, food inflation has surprised dramatically on the downside. Seasonal pickup in prices of vegetables and fruits in summer months was simply missing due to a combination of increased mandi arrivals, export policies and other supply management measures. This, coupled with a normal monsoon, has shifted RBI's food inflation projections significantly downward.

54. Elsewhere, fuel inflation continues its rapid upward march. While inflation excluding food and fuel has eased marginally due to lower momentum in certain goods and services, it remains at elevated levels. International crude oil prices keep surging as Iran sanctions approach, creating a difficult choice between pass-through to the pump prices and fiscal or quasi-fiscal absorption through excise cuts. The rising oil prices also coincide with the misfortune of weaker current account balance, inducing financial market volatility which raises imported inflation, though the direct impact of oil price on inflation via the consequent fare price impact is much larger. The worry is that this could generalise quickly through transportation and freight costs – input costs – that could get passed on to selling prices as capacity utilisation is improving and pricing power is returning to firms.

55. While there was mild softening in the 12-month ahead inflation expectations of households between the June 2018 and September 2018 rounds of RBI’s surveys, the 3-month expectations showed a sharp uptick. I am particularly concerned about the near 200 basis points increase in the 3-month and 12-month inflation expectations of households, based on the surveys of September 2017 to September 2018. Households are telling us that their inflation outlook has moved palpably upwards. Business expectations of headline inflation as well as input costs are showing similar trends, rising steadily in RBI's and other surveys.

56. As a result, headline inflation for Q1:2019-20 is projected at 4.8% vis-à-vis the mandated target of 4%, in spite of the benign food inflation outlook. Between the time the projections were finalised for the Monetary Policy Report (specifically, October 1) and today (October 5), oil prices have risen steeply, without any signs of durable supply adjustment amidst strong global demand.

57. Growth has been reasonably buoyant as evidenced by the real economic activity indicators for both the rural economy and the urban counterpart. Our estimates of the output gap suggest it has virtually closed as per the traditional measures; my preferred finance-neutral output gap measure has in fact turned positive due to asset price growth and especially non-food credit growth that is now in excess of the nominal GDP growth rate.

58. In such a milieu, the likelihood of oil prices remaining elevated rules out a rate cut anytime soon. Second round effects of the steep oil price rise can generalise causing inflation expectations to unhinge. Even if pass-through to pump prices is made less than one for one, inflation risk would generalise through fiscal slippage.

59. Given these factors, and given the flexible inflation-targeting mandate of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), it seems important to signal commitment to keeping to the mandate and move forward carefully at an appropriate time, allowing the economy to adjust to the past two back-to-back rate hikes while being vigilant of any emerging inflationary pressures.

60. Hence, I vote for not to raise the policy rate but change the stance of monetary policy to one of “calibrated tightening”