42. Developments on inflation and growth fronts since the last meeting of MPC in December 2017 have been more or less on expected lines. Although the headline inflation was expected to rise in November and December 2017, the extent of increase was higher than I expected. However, it is likely to decline during the next 3-4 months on account of favourable base effect and seasonal factors. The expectation about recovery in the growth of GVA remained subdued in the Economic Survey 2017-18 in line with what I had anticipated in my statement in the last meeting of MPC. Capacity utilisation continues to be stubborn at around 72 per cent reflecting continued presence of excess capacity in manufacturing sectors. As I have been arguing, the output gap continues to be negative and expanding. Inflation expectations of households 12 months ahead show marginal decline over the previous round in spite of the headline inflation sharply picking up during the survey period. The latest Business Inflation Expectation Survey (BIES) conducted by the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) with more than 2500 respondents finds that their expectation about costs 12 months ahead has risen by 40 basis points but still remains at 3.7 per cent. Even the RBI’s forecast of the headline inflation 12 months ahead is around 4.5-4.6 per cent.

43. However, inflation trends need to be watched carefully. Although the base effects are going to be favorable over the next 3-4 months, the oil price movements can create uncertainties and serious upside risks. The fiscal space to accommodate future higher oil price shocks seems to be absent given the slippage in the Union budget for 2018-19. Impact of the increase in customs duty and MSP proposed in the budget on the headline inflation is again uncertain. Although there is substantial fiscal slippage by the Centre, the fiscal performance of major states needs to be watched. Their revenues are now more certain and the Centre has provided for an increased transfer of tax revenues to states by 0.2 percentage points of GDP in the budget. As a result, the fiscal discipline by states is a critical factor to watch – whether it compounds or compensates for the fiscal indiscipline of the Centre. Moreover, the implementation of the HRA revisions by states and other bodies like universities and its likely impact on the headline inflation is again uncertain though its primary effect is only statistical.

44. Under all these uncertainties and conflicting trends, prudence lies in following the policy of wait and watch and allow clearer picture to emerge. Hence, I vote for maintaining the status quo on both the policy rate and neutral stance.