45. I maintain my vote for a 25 basis points increase in the policy rate. Underlying macroeconomic developments impart some urgency to commencing the withdrawal of accommodation.

46. The ebbing of inflation in January and February will likely extend into the reading for March, given the continuing decline in prices of vegetables. Does it present a persuasive case for an easier/neutral monetary policy stance? In my view, that will be time-inconsistent and will push the achievement of the inflation target farther out in time, given the current assessment that the target is not likely to be achieved during the full course of 2018-19, absent policy action.

47. It is important to recognise that volatility in the prices of vegetables is obscuring a clearer evaluation of underlying inflation pressures. An unseasonal spike in November has given way to a delayed seasonal easing in February and March, which should reverse by April-May. Accordingly, this transient supply shock, however favourable it might be, has to be looked through while setting monetary policy so that the focus is on the real risks to food inflation looming over the horizon from (a) increases in minimum support prices announced in the union budget; and (b) the shortfall in wheat output and the implications for prices of cereals.

48. The main risks to the achievement of the target are festering in the category of CPI excluding food and fuel in which inflation has stubbornly risen above 5 per cent over the past three months. Over the course of 2018-19, inflation in this category is expected to peak close to 6 per cent in June and moderate in the rest of the year to settle at a little above 5 per cent. It is necessary, however, to adjust for the statistical impact of the HRA in assessing this trajectory. After the adjustment, the baseline path of inflation excluding food and fuel is one of monotonical hardening till the end of the year without the June peak. Meanwhile, upside risks in the form of international crude prices, rising raw material and other input prices, the slow return of pricing power among corporates, the spectre of trade wars and embedded tariff increases - which could turn out to be both inflationary and growth retarding – and bouts of global spillovers as markets re-price the normalization of monetary policy by systemic central banks have increased. Should the food situation turn adverse or overwhelm food management strategies, we will have to deal with inflation testing the upper tolerance limit of the inflation band. Households are reflecting these fears in their inflation expectations, and both bond and credit markets have been tightening interest rates well ahead of the MPC.

49. Impulses of growth are strengthening. The turnaround in the pace of investment is the defining feature of 2017-18 in contrast to the consumption-led growth in preceding years. Foodgrains and horticulture production are set to scale new records. Manufacturing is on an accelerating mode and the recovery is broadening and encompassing an increasing number of constituent industries in its ambit. It is supported by rising sales growth, an uptick in seasonally adjusted capacity utilization, drawdown of finished goods inventories and upbeat business confidence even as the regaining of pricing power is helping to shore up profit margins. There are also indications of the capex cycle gradually starting up. It is important that these drivers be nurtured to full strength and traction, and not be frittered away by allowing inflation to get out of hand in an environment of fiscal slippages at the central and state levels, a current account deficit that is modest but on the rise, and balance sheets of banks and corporates still fragile.