39. I vote for raising the policy repo rate by 25 basis points and for accordingly aligning the operating target with the policy action.

40. First, inflation has hardened through the first quarter of the year, extending its upturn into the third consecutive month in June. The forecast – the intermediate target that provides a proximate view of how the goal variables are forming – suggests that inflation is likely to encounter a soft patch in the second quarter, but it will resume an upward trajectory in the second half of the year.

41. Second, the recent softening of international crude prices has afforded some respite from inflation pressures. The outlook, though, is clouded with uncertainty as to how geopolitical tensions, OPEC production commitments, global demand and inventory adjustments will play out. It is prudent to prepare for international crude prices remaining elevated and volatile for some time.

42. Third, the recent experience is suffused with global spillovers impacting the bond and forex markets in India. Apart from implications for growth and external sustainability, financial turbulence feeding into volatile inflation outcomes is a real and present risk.

43. Fourth, the inflationary consequences of MSP revisions remain an upside risk. The pass-through of the announced MSPs to retail inflation is conditioned by two big unknowns: (a) the scale and ambit of procurement operations when they commence in Q3; and (b) the pace of drawdown of stocks in the case of paddy, the main crop for effective procurement in the Kharif season. A fair assumption can be that it will not be business as usual in view of the size of increases in MSPs this year that fulfils the commitment given in the Union Budget, and the timing of the announcement.

44. That said, the inflation trajectory is expected to slant upwards in the third and fourth quarters of 2018-19 and in the first quarter of the next financial year. Households and professional forecasters are anticipating it, corporates are reporting rising input costs which could swiftly translate into pricing power as the output gap closes and demand pressures build up. Consumers are pessimistic about the future course of the price situation.

45. The risk of failing to achieve the inflation target, and of being perceived as willing to accommodate deviations over the remaining period for which the MPC is tasked, has increased significantly. This could unhinge inflation expectations, dent the credibility of the MPC and allow inflation outcomes to test the upper tolerance band. This evolving configuration warrants an adequate monetary policy response, so that inflation realigns with the target and inflation expectations remain anchored.

46. The economy is poised for an acceleration of growth in 2018-19 relative to 2017-18, but the drivers of growth are amorphous at this juncture. International crude prices and global spillovers from trade wars, monetary policy normalisation and geopolitical tensions present significant risks to growth prospects. In this highly volatile and unsettled international environment, stability has to be secured on an enduring basis to enable the drivers of growth to gain traction and to preserve external viability.

47. My preference, therefore, is to reinforce the policy action that commenced in June with another policy rate increase now and to allow the accumulated policy impulse to work its way through the economy, while vigil is maintained on the expected rising path of inflation going forward. The softer inflation prints expected in Q2 could likely lull inflation expectations, but abundant precaution and decisiveness in quelling risks to the target is warranted if the hard-earned gains in terms of macroeconomic stability and credibility have to be preserved.