36. CPI inflation continued its upward trajectory in November and December 2017, climbing to a 17 month high of 5.2% in December, partly due to an unfavourable base effect. This increase was also driven by an increase in food prices, along with inflation in fuel due to a rise in global crude prices. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel also increased in December, partly due to housing inflation driven by the effects of house rent allowance for government employees under the 7th central pay commission.

37. Going forward, several upside risks to inflation remain. These include the possibility of an increase in global commodity prices and higher crude oil prices. Fiscal deficit slippage and the slower than expected fiscal consolidation as well as the staggered impact of house rent allowance by state governments may also exert pressure on inflation. The proposal in the Budget to link the minimum support prices (MSPs) for kharif crops with 1.5 times the cost of production, may also drive inflation up, although its impact cannot be ascertained as yet. The Union Budget has also proposed an increase in customs duty on several items. Further, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) of the RBI suggests hardening of input prices which may be passed on to the consumers and lead to higher CPI inflation. Households’ inflation expectations, as per RBI’s survey of households, remain high for both three-month-ahead and one-year-ahead forecast horizons. Meanwhile, the Indian Future Inflation Gauge, a harbinger of inflation (constructed by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, with which the author is affiliated), has increased in recent months, indicating an uptick in inflation pressures.

38. At the same time, positive signs of economic growth are visible. To begin with, the implementation of the GST is stabilising. Other positive factors include the recapitalisation of public sector banks and steps towards NPA resolution under the insolvency and bankruptcy code. Credit growth has also increased in December. Steps have also been taken in the Union Budget to revive economic activity, with a focus on rural and infrastructure sectors.

39. However, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Index, a predictor of future economic activity, has eased lately, indicating fading economic growth prospects, Also, ECRI’s international leading indexes suggest that global growth will ease this year. Moreover, with growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Exports Index, which anticipates the direction of exports growth, staying subdued, the Indian export growth outlook remains restrained.

40. There is also concern about global financial market volatility against the backdrop of rising global bond yields and uncertainty regarding the normalisation of monetary policy by major advanced economies.

41. Thus, with upside risks to inflation and lacklustre growth prospects, a wait and watch strategy with status quo in policy interest rate and a neutral stance is currently recommended.