49. Since the October 2018 Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting, there have been two downward surprises to realised inflation.

50. First, food inflation has had an unexpectedly large collapse, again in vegetables and fruits, but somewhat more broad-based than the inflation decline in preceding months; the collapse has been sharper in rural inflation than in urban inflation.

51. Secondly, international crude oil prices that had been simmering to levels above $85 per barrel also crashed dramatically – by close to 30%. It appears that the “stock out” supply risk that was priced at the short end of the oil futures curve has subsided as the curve has flattened now compared to its sharp backwardation shape in early October. The oil price crash, in turn, has improved external sector prospects for India and caused the currency to strengthen appreciably, reducing the magnitude of imported inflation.

52. Together, these factors have resulted in an extraordinary downward revision in the Reserve Bank’s 12-month ahead inflation outlook. However, the past two months have also been extraordinarily volatile, making it difficult to make a complete sense of recent data. Let me elaborate.

53. First, it is not easy to ascertain fully at this stage the nature of the collapse of food inflation seen in recent months, particularly in terms of its implications for the food inflation outlook over the medium term. A clearer assessment is particularly clouded by divergence in the direction of price movements in data in key food items provided by the Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) and realised food inflation for October. Such divergence in the direction is rarely observed. Further examination of data is necessary to understand with greater clarity the drivers of food deflation.

54. Secondly, market indicators of uncertainty in international crude oil prices remain high, reflecting the unexpectedly large gyrations in their movement this year and upcoming geo-political risks such as OPEC supply decision and trade war uncertainty’s impact on global demand. The implied volatility in crude oil options markets was around 25% per annum (p.a.) in October, which rose to around 45% p.a following the oil price crash. This is a rather high level of uncertainty embedded in expectations of market participants.

55. Thirdly, inflation excluding food and fuel remains persistently high. It is over 6% at present, with only 20-30 basis points attributable to the statistical impact of Centre’s House Rent Allowances (HRA).

56. Fourthly, the Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey suggests that input cost pressures are still high for firms and expected to remain elevated (consistent with both closing of the output gap and improvement in capacity utilisation beyond the long period average). This is expected to result in cost pass-through to consumers in the coming months.

57. Fifthly, median household inflation expectations have softened at 3-month horizon by 40 basis points but remain unchanged for 12-month horizon. Over a 12-month period during which the Reserve Bank has raised the policy rate by 50 basis points (bps), median household expectations of inflation for 3-month horizon have risen by 150 bps and for 12-month horizon by 120 bps.

58. Finally, the risk of a fiscal slippage at the center and/or state levels appears to be considered within the realm of reasonable possibility. As such, the sharp decline in oil prices has provided an opportunity for fiscal consolidation.

59. In summary, even though the projections have been revised downwards significantly, several upside risks remain. In my view, it is better to understand data somewhat better over the next two months. Counter-factual exercises suggest that with headline inflation at 12-month horizon above the target (at 4.2% in Q2 of 2019-20), a change in the stance at this stage, especially with heightened oil price volatility, would be premature. In other words, while the recent downward surprises to inflation have significantly reduced the extent of policy tightening required in future, they have not eliminated the requirement altogether.

60. Turning to growth, the outlook remains overall healthy, though there are some signs of emerging downside risks. On the positive front, investment has picked up and should be buoyed further by improving capacity utilisation. Composite PMI stands at its highest level in 24 months. Coincident and leading indicators, such as aggregate bank credit, are increasing above the nominal GDP growth rate. Oil price and external sector pressures have reduced which should ease financing conditions. On the negative front, there are some segments experiencing slowdown such as auto sales, but at least a part of this appears, in our research, to be linked to fuel price rise of past six months and regulatory revisions in mandatory third-party insurance requirements. The Q2 print for GDP growth was below the Reserve Bank’s expectation but the Q1 print was far above. Overall, due to change in macroeconomic conditions, the two-sided growth surprises have not led to revision in our growth forecast for next 12 months.

61. On balance, given the relatively short period of time over which inflation has softened, it is important to wait and watch, i.e., remain data-dependent as well as reliant on clear understanding of the drivers of recent data. I, therefore, vote for keeping the policy repo rate on hold and maintaining the stance of monetary policy as calibrated tightening.