37. After the last meeting of the MPC in June 2018, the monthly headline inflation prints for May and June have turned out to be less than expected by the RBI and, as I had pointed out a possibility in my last statement, have resulted in lowering the forecast for Q4:2018-19. The current forecast of RBI does not show this decline and on the contrary shows an increase by about 20 bps only because it incorporates a remotely possible impact of MSP revisions on the headline inflation. Such an impact, on the other hand, is so uncertain even in its existence and definitely in magnitude that experts in the field advise to wait and watch till the revised MSP is implemented on ground by November 2018. There are so many well-known constraints on its implementation that prudence lies in not basing any policy rate decisions till clarity emerges on it. Once we take this crucial uncertain factor out, the rest of the developments do not warrant any change in the status quo even with a very conservative view. I, therefore, vote for the status quo both in the policy repo rate and the neutral stance. More specific reasons for my vote are:

The argument of a pre-emptive consecutive rate hike at this stage pre-supposes: (a) complete failure of the rate hike effected in the June 2018 policy on impacting the inflationary expectations in the economy, and (b) headline inflation forecasts ex-house rent revisions a year ahead increasing further without any uncertainty. Neither of these two pre-suppositions is correct. Although the RBI survey of the household inflationary expectations shows an increase in its median quantum by 20 bps, the proportion of respondents expecting higher inflation 12 months ahead declined noticeably. Moreover, the IIMA Business Inflation Expectation Survey conducted in June 2018 (after the repo rate hike by 25 bps) shows a sharp decline in the headline CPI inflation expectation 12 months ahead from 4.67 percent in the April 2018 round to 4.16 percent in the June 2018 round. This survey covered more than 1600 companies and shows low standard deviation. There are several reasons why the second pre-supposition is incorrect.

The Central and State governments have shown reasonable commitment to the fiscal discipline in terms of bringing the fiscal deficit down. There is no reason to expect a substantial fiscal slippage this year despite the next year being an election year.

GST rate reductions on several items may reduce the inflation marginally.

Inflationary expectations of urban households have increased as per the RBI survey because two consecutive inflation readings (May and June 2018) increased. They are likely to fall when the next two consecutive readings (July and August 2018) would show a decline. Even RBI inflation forecasts point to this possibility on account of the strong base effects. If the actual fall in CPI inflation for July and August 2018 turns out to be larger than what RBI projected, their 12 month ahead inflation forecast may also show a reduction. Given the recent track record of RBI in terms of their near term forecasts, this possibility cannot be ruled out.

Concerns about core inflation are misplaced on two counts: (a) the mandated target for our Committee is headline CPI inflation including food and fuel; and (b) my paper with a co-author in the Economic and Political Weekly (March 3, 2018) shows that inflation dynamics have changed during the last decade such that it is the core that adjusts to the headline and not vice-versa.

The oil prices have not further increased. If at all, they show a marginal decline from $75 in early June 2018 to $72.5 towards the end of July 2018. All these factors together would bring down the baseline inflation forecast for Q4:2018-19. Only the most uncertain impact of MSP revisions on food prices after 2 or 3 quarters can push the inflation forecast marginally higher. In my opinion, we should not consider such a highly uncertain impact for a rate hike decision.

On the other hand, there are disturbing signals and evidences pointing to likely slow down on the growth front. Capacity utilization seasonally adjusted has sharply fallen by 130 bps as per the RBI survey. It contradicts the RBI claim that output gap has closed. Actually, it is not getting closed, but is likely to widen creating downward pressure on wages and prices.

Corporate performance points to less investment in fixed and financial assets in H2:2017-18 and is also likely to fall during 2018-19 as revealed by the pipeline projects up to 2017-18. Bonds and debentures issues by the private sector declined in Q1:2018-19.

Global growth is not likely to sustain. Our exports may not grow at the envisaged rate due to tariff wars and increased protectionism.

Real policy rate is already positive and very high compared to most other countries. For businesses, it is well above +2 percent (since their inflation expectation 12 months ahead is only 4.16 percent). It is already adversely impacting capital formation. All these factors will put further downward pressure on inflation.

38. This is certainly not the time and environment to hike the policy rate. Nor is it the time to tinker with the policy stance. Prudence lies in maintaining status quo on both.