31. Anchoring inflationary expectations, which are shaped by the target, is extremely important in an inflation targeting regime. If there is substantial deviation of inflationary expectations in relation to the target, by failing to react with the policy interest rate, we will lose credibility and reduce our capacity to influence expectations.

32. While I am comforted by the decline in median inflationary expectations of households for the 1-year ahead horizon by 30 bps in the last RBI’s survey, the median 1-year ahead expectations are now higher by 180 basis points over the September 2017 round. Meanwhile, the three-month median inflationary expectations increased by 50 bps compared to the previous round, with a cumulative increase of about 220 basis points over the September 2017 round.

33. What makes these cumulative increases in inflationary expectations salient, is that they risk being unanchored by both the 7% nominal depreciation in the INR and the USD 13 a barrel increase in the price of oil, since the August 2018 policy. Another factor is the nature and scope of MSP implementation, details of which are still not clear. My own projections with the above variables suggest that these factors will push inflation beyond the Q1 FY19-20 projection of 4.8% made by the RBI. Doing so risks the possibility of the un-anchoring of inflationary expectations which will impair our ability to keep headline inflation durably at 4%.

34. There has been a slight moderation in CPI inflation, excluding food and fuel to 6.0% in August, from 6.2% in July, which is comforting. The elevated value of ex food and fuel inflation is consistent with a nearly-closed output gap which should be carefully watched.

35. On the growth front, the Q1 of 18-19 GDP growth at 8.2% was strong. GVA growth was also strong at 8% (compared to 7.6% in Q4 17-18). Sectoral growth patterns in agriculture, manufacturing, and services in Q1 of 18-19 numbers were robust. Capex good production remains resilient, and the growth in consumer non-durables, which was lack-luster before, has picked up.

36. These numbers are confirmed by RBI’s own surveys. Demand conditions in the manufacturing sector continued to improve with the latest round of the RBI industrial outlook survey (of 1095 manufacturing companies) showing strong sentiments on production and order books. The RBI’s enterprise survey, OBICUS, based on a survey of 994 companies, showed a seasonally adjusted increase in capacity utilization at a 20-quarter high. Firms expect demand conditions to improve in Q3 FY 18-19 on the back of improved business expectations. Higher inventories indicate that producers are stocking up in anticipation of higher demand in coming quarters. Upward pressure on input and staff costs continue to push up selling prices, posing a risk to headline inflation. The most recent PMI manufacturing corroborates this, showing an uptick in input prices and output prices, although the pass through is lower.

37. What worries me on the pick up in growth is the dismal consumer confidence numbers, with consumer confidence in Q2 FY 18-19 worsening. Ideally, in a growing economy, the durability of growth is better sustained if it is supported by growing consumer confidence. Notwithstanding this, I continue to remain sanguine about current and medium term growth prospects as in the last policy.

38. Despite the two hikes in the policy rate in the last two policies, the data since August risks impairing our ability to keep headline inflation durably at 4%. I say this fully cognizant of the trade-off facing the MPC: moving too quickly and needlessly shortening the growth turnaround or, calibrating the rate hikes too slowly, and risking an over-heating in an economy with a nearly closed output gap. Given the strong possibility of the un-anchoring of inflationary expectations for the reasons given above, the appropriate “risk-management approach” would be to act now. We should not allow the commitment to the 4% target to be flexible.

39. I vote for an increase in the policy repo rate by 25 basis points at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee. I also vote for a change in the stance from “neutral” to “calibrated tightening”.