26. Since the last policy, demand conditions in the manufacturing sector have continued to improve. There is a significant improvement in the risk profile of the firms in most sub-sectors based on corporate results for H2:17-18. There is a noticeable improvement in consumer confidence, although the current situation index continues to be in the pessimistic zone. Organized sector wages – a proxy for pay inflation – continue to rise and need to be carefully watched. The increase in capacity utilization has coincided with better corporate performance. The Services PMI also expanded to a 12 month high in June.

27. On the expenditure side, private consumption (PFCE) continues to be the main driver of growth, and it will be further supported by a shift in the terms of trade towards agriculture, and the likelihood of a normal monsoon. Economic growth in the short run will also be buoyed by a political business cycle. The adverse implications of a political business cycle on fiscal consolidation should be carefully watched since fiscal consolidation is often a key feature of the adjustment required to contain trade imbalances. High frequency indicators on consumption suggest a mild tapering in the growth momentum since the last policy. Headline IIP also softened to 3.2% in May compared to 4.8% in April. Overall, I remain sanguine about current and medium term growth prospects.

28. One year projections of headline inflation (ex HRA) continue to durably persist above 4%, as in the last policy. CPI inflation ex food and fuel has continued to sustain above 6%, with strong momentum effects. On the positive side, this reflects a closing output gap. Favorable base effects will also prevail over a 12 month horizon for the ex food and fuel and ex HRA group, which will slow down CPI ex food and fuel and ex HRA inflation. Food inflation continues to be maverick. It ranged between 1.7% and 2.1% in Q1:18-19 and is the reason for the May-June 2018 undershoot of projections. Except food, all other groups contributed to an increase in headline inflation in the last few months. For instance, there is a tangible rise in price pressures in the miscellaneous sub-group (health, education, transport) in the last three months, possibly reflecting supply constraints in these sectors. Food inflation surprises continue to be one way, which is a puzzle. Crude prices have inched down, although the average price of crude remains elevated with risks persisting.

29. Both 3 month and 1 year ahead inflationary expectations have also hardened, which is worrisome. If inflationary expectations are well anchored, the 1 year ahead inflationary expectations should be less sensitive to “news” shocks (such as the recent elevated levels of the price of crude) compared to the 3 month level. The fact that median inflationary expectations (both 3 month and the 1 year ahead) in the last round increased roughly by the same amount (20 basis points) compared to the last policy suggests that much work lies ahead in making monetary policy more credible and anchoring inflationary expectations.

30. One more risk that has crystallized to the upside since the June review is the recent announcement of minimum support prices for Kharif crops for 2018. The weighted average increase in MSP, based on CPI weights, for 2018-2019 works out to 17%. Compared to this, the average increase in MSP for 2014-2015 to 2017-2018 was 3.6%. Higher MSPs of this magnitude have the potential of pushing headline inflation sustainably and significantly beyond the 4 percent target for headline inflation mandated in the RBI Act. While the final inflationary impact will depend on the exact procurement policy which is yet to be announced, given the magnitude of the MSP surprise, it is opportune to frontload a rate hike, somewhat akin to an “insurance policy”. In this regard, it will be crucial to watch how the twin terms trade of shocks – referenced to in my last few statements – play out on macroeconomic aggregates in the coming months.

31. For these reasons, I vote for an increase in the policy repo rate by 25 basis points at today’s meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.