40. Headline inflation softened to 3.7 per cent in August from 4.2 per cent in July and 4.9 per cent in June, mainly due to the drop in food inflation from 3.1 per cent in June to 1.7 per cent in July and 0.9 per cent in August. Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of an increase in house rent allowance (HRA) of central government employees (as per RBI’s calculations) also moderated from 4.6 per cent in June to 3.4 per cent in August, while CPI excluding food and fuel and adjusted for the impact of an increase in HRA fell from 5.7 per cent in June to 5.4 per cent in August. At the same time, various surveys provide mixed signals regarding inflation expectations. The September round of the Reserve Bank’s Survey of Households points towards an increase of 50 basis points in three-month-ahead inflation expectations but a moderation of 30 basis points in one-year-ahead expectations. The July-September round of the Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey indicates that manufacturing firms expect higher cost of raw materials, input prices and selling prices. The manufacturing and services PMIs also signal a similar trend.

41. Looking forward, the downside risks to the inflation outlook include benign food inflation. The recent cuts in excise duty on petrol and diesel are expected to moderate retail inflation. However, crude oil prices have escalated and the rupee has weakened considerably, with potential pass-through effects on inflation. Moreover, with EME currencies depreciating against the US dollar, volatility in global financial markets continues to impart uncertainty to the inflation outlook. Additionally, fiscal slippages by the government may have adverse implications for market volatility, and may crowd out private investment and impact the outlook for inflation. The upside risks associated with an increase in minimum support prices (MSPs) and the HRA still persist, although the latter has somewhat moderated. Risks due to an increase in state level HRAs and input prices also prevail. Thus, there is considerable uncertainty with respect to the inflation outlook.

42. On the output side, GDP growth in the first quarter of 2018-19 was strong, with robust growth in private consumption. However, downside risks to investment activity include an increase in input prices and crude oil prices and tightening of global and domestic financial conditions, including the recent developments in the non-banking sector. Despite a depreciating rupee, growth in exports may also be hampered due to geopolitical risks, trade war and slowing global economy.

43. Indeed, growth in the Indian Leading Export Index, a predictor of the direction of exports growth maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, remains in the doldrums, indicating an unfavourable Indian export growth outlook. This is consistent with weakening growth in ECRI’s 20-country composite Long Leading Index, which still points to a global growth slowdown. However, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Index, a harbinger of future economic activity, has firmed lately, pointing to somewhat improved economic growth prospects.

44. In sum, while inflation has softened, upside risks to inflation remain, along with some downside risks to output growth. The policy repo rate has already been increased in the past two consecutive meetings of the MPC (June and August), each time by 25 basis points. Due to the transmission lags, the effects of these may take time to play out. It is therefore best to pause and wait and watch while maintaining a vigil on inflation. I therefore vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged. At the same time, given the upside risks to inflation, I also vote for a change in the stance from neutral to calibrated tightening.