56. CPI inflation moderated in January-February, led largely by a sharp decline in vegetable prices and continuing deflation in pulses. Fuel group inflation also moderated mainly on the back of a decline in liquefied petroleum gas inflation, reflecting softening in international prices. These developments, combined with the continued softening in vegetable prices in March, are expected to pull down the headline CPI inflation in Q4:2017-18 below the projection made in February. However, it is noteworthy that over the last three months (December-February), the monthly CPI headline inflation (year-on-year) adjusted for house rent allowance (HRA) revision has averaged 4.6 percent.

57. Going forward, the combined effects of the observed moderation in food inflation in January-February and the expected further softening in March are likely to result in lower headline inflation trajectory in the first half of 2018-19 vis-à-vis the February statement. This will be despite the likely seasonal reversal of food prices in the first half. Inflation expectations have firmed up, both for three-month and one-year ahead horizons. Input cost pressures are rising and the corporates are gradually regaining some pricing power. The outlook of inflation also faces several uncertainties emanating from: (i) the increase in minimum support prices for kharif crops; (ii) elevated and volatile crude oil prices, in part due to geo-political factors; (iii) the staggered impact of revision in HRA by various State Governments – the direct impact on inflation will be statistical in nature, which will be looked through; (iv) fiscal slippages by the Centre and the States; and (v) the performance of the monsoon.

58. Economic activity has been recovering, with the GDP growth in 2018-19 projected to be higher at 7.4 per cent (with balanced risks) as compared with 6.6 per cent in the previous year. There are clearer signs of revival of investment activity. The manufacturing sector is strengthening, which is also reflected in higher capacity utilisation. Improving global demand and trade should boost manufacturing and investment activity, going forward. Leading indicators also point to the strengthening of the services sector; purchasing managers’ index (PMI) for services moved into the expansion zone again in March. Credit offtake from the banking sector has continued to improve and it is becoming gradually more broad-based. The flow of funds from non-bank sources to the corporate sector has also been rising.

59. Even as inflation has moderated in recent months, several upside risks to inflation persist. Hence, I would like to wait for more data and watch how various risks to inflation evolve, going forward. I, therefore, vote for holding the policy repo rate at the current level and maintaining the stance as neutral.