45. In April last year, I expressed a preference for a pre-emptive policy rate increase, sensing that inflation is rising out of the demonetisation trough. I voted, however, for holding the rate unchanged through the June and August meetings to allow transitory effects to fully pass. My vote for status quo was maintained in August even though the Committee by majority decision reduced the policy rate by 25 basis points in that meeting.

46. By the October meeting, my stance had been vindicated. Looking ahead, I saw inflation stripped of house rent allowance effects exceeding the target by the end of the year. Worrying that a vicious spiral could be developing – input costs; domestic prices of petroleum products; inflation expectations – as the slowdown in growth troughed and geared to pick up in the second half of the year, I provided specific forward guidance.

47. My vote for status quo was conditioned to inflation staying within the target, with a readiness to raise the policy rate if inflation drivers strengthen. By the December meeting, the time had come to take guard, bringing to critical mass my stance articulated since April.

48. Circling back to the present, several drivers of inflation are firing at the same time – upward adjustments of domestic POL prices in response to the hardening of international crude prices, including catching up with withheld pass-through; imminent MSP increases; fiscal slippage; customs duty increases. Various measures of underlying inflation are converging to the headline at above 5 per cent. Expectations are elevated and volatile. Fixed income markets are telling us that we have fallen behind the curve.

49. In the near term outlook (up to mid-2018), inflation is likely to drift well above target. It is important to recognise that the expected easing of inflation in the outer months of the forecast horizon ­– between July 2018 and March 2019 – is largely statistical as the HRA effect wanes. The target is in danger of getting out of reach and over the next few months, the upper tolerance band is under threat. This could seriously dent the credibility of the Committee’s commitment to the target.

50. Turning to the state of the economy, a turnaround has likely begun in the third quarter of 2017-18 – sales are accelerating even as inventories are being drawn down; the capex cycle is starting up; and pricing power is returning. External demand is providing support as exports grow at ASEAN rates. Accelerating growth in non oil non bullion imports is reflecting domestic demand, including substitution effects, impatient with the sluggishness in the supply response.

51. The output gap is starting to turn up from a persistently negative state. If the professional forecasters’ consensus around 7 per cent plus growth for 2018-19 materialises, the output gap is expected to close going forward.

52. If the statistical reversal of the HRA effect is looked through, the real policy rate is below 1 per cent and could fall further absent policy action. This is completely misaligned with underlying fundamentals and the economy's prospects at a time when activity is picking up. In view of the prolonged period of status quo, a series of rate increases may be warranted to remove excessive accommodation. The time to begin is upon us.

53. I vote for an increase of 25 basis points in the policy rate to commence the withdrawal of accommodation.