60. The GDP print for the first quarter of 2019-20, high frequency indicators for the second quarter up to August, the indicators that have become available for September such as auto sales of industry majors, bank credit, the lowest GST collections in 19 months, and the wide swathe of downgrades of projections suggest that the downturn in the economy, and especially in spending, may be deeper and more pervasive than expected. This justifies the pre-emptive accommodative stance adopted by the MPC since February 2019. Headwinds from the global slowdown are also stronger than initially envisaged, and broader in their impact on domestic activity: transmitted through trade, they seem to be active in muting industrial activity and investment across borders. Sensing this, business expectations for the third quarter and consumer confidence over a year ahead have moderated from their earlier readings. This pronounced cyclical downswing suggests that the state of the economy will likely get worse before it gets better.

61. Meanwhile, inflation continues to trail below target and is projected to remain so over the 12 months ahead horizon. Its underlying dynamics excluding food and fuel seem to be mirroring the growing slack in the economy, given the succession of soft readings and the broad-based nature of its ebbing. If one-off factors like gold prices are excluded, inflation excluding food and fuel falls below target. Although inflation expectations of households a year ahead have ticked up, they are essentially adapting to the firming up of food prices in the summer. Businesses are anticipating modest input cost pressures but still lack pricing power, rendering the outlook on selling prices benign.

62. The conduct of monetary policy requires as accurate as feasible a sense of the economy’s potential output, given that is unobservable. This enables an assessment of the state of the output gap – the difference between actual and potential output – so as to gauge where the economy is positioned on the business cycle. Accordingly, monetary policy can perform its stabilisation or countercyclical role that is appropriate to the situation. The lament of the monetary policy wielder has been that potential output is notoriously difficult to estimate. But, amidst the evolving configuration of macro-fundamentals in India, actual output itself and its future path are overcast with high uncertainty. Consequently, the extent of the slack in the economy due to deficient demand is obscure, although that input is vital for setting the monetary policy stance.

63. In this challenging environment, my call would be for prudence rather than being data-dependent. In its counter-cyclical role, monetary policy has to be pre-emptive in addressing the negative gaps – inflation below target, and output below potential – that seem to be developing some persistence. Available space for policy action has to be calibrated to secure the closure of the gaps.

64. The outlook is fraught with downside risks, but the prospects for agriculture have brightened and along with industry’s inventory restocking requirements in the festival season, scope opens up for reviving spending. In this endeavour, interest rate smoothing is the preferred approach: reinforcing the policy intent with successive steps so as to obviate monetary policy surprises; nudging transmission to bank deposit and lending rates with repetitive but calibrated policy actions in the same direction that also offset the risk premium that appears to be building up in several sectors of the economy.

65. In my minutes at the time of the June 2019 meeting of the MPC, I had emphasised that while monetary policy is taking the lead as the first line of defence, a full throttle effort by all arms of macroeconomic management is the need of the hour. Over recent weeks, monetary and fiscal actions have been undertaken, and it is important to buttress this coordinated endeavour.

66. Accordingly, I vote for a 25 basis points reduction in the policy rate while maintaining an accommodative policy stance until economic activity in India is reinvigorated and firmly on the path of recovery.