77. The CPI inflation print of December at 2.2 per cent continued to surprise on the downside. The overall food group continued to remain in deflation with the decline in food prices becoming more broad-based. Five constituents of the food group – vegetables, sugar, pulses, eggs and fruits – were in deflation in December. Fuel inflation also decelerated significantly mainly due to a sharp decline in the price of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Inflation excluding food and fuel also moderated, dragged down mainly by the decline in the prices of petrol and diesel in line with the decline in international petroleum product prices. Housing inflation continued to edge down. However, inflation in household goods and services; health; recreation and amusement; and education firmed up in December 2018.

78. Going forward, the outlook for food inflation is expected to be benign in the backdrop of excess domestic supply conditions in many food items. The lower prices in the international markets in food items also limit the avenues for exports to address the domestic surplus. This will be an important factor in keeping the overall inflation low. Soft crude oil prices augur well for keeping the petroleum product inflation under check and this will help in containing the input costs for goods and services. Inflation expectations of households have declined significantly in the last round, which is a welcome development. CPI inflation is projected at below four per cent in the remaining four quarters – 2.8 per cent in Q4:2018-19, 3.2-3.4 per cent in H1:2019-20 and 3.9 per cent in Q3:2019-20 – with risks broadly balanced. Beyond the near-term, however, there is a need to guard against some uncertainties surrounding the inflation outlook such as (i) abrupt reversal in vegetable prices; (ii) haziness in the oil price outlook; (iii) the recent unusual spike in the prices of health and education, which calls for vigilance; and (iv) the impact of several budget proposals on the aggregate demand, though the full effect of the measures will materialise over a period of time.

79. Turning to the growth outlook, the CSO has placed India’s real GDP growth at 7.2 per cent in 2018-19. Looking further ahead, there are signs of domestic growth slowing down somewhat, compared to the Reserve Bank’s earlier projections. The more recent high frequency indicators point to investment demand losing some traction, with production of capital goods and import of capital goods contracting in recent months. High frequency indicators also suggest moderation in demand (passenger cars, consumer durables, motorcycles and tractor sales).

80. On the supply side, rabi sowing so far has been marginally lower than the previous year, with shortfall across crops. There is, however, an expectation that the acreage will increase in the remaining part of the sowing season. Extended winter conditions are also likely to have a positive impact on overall wheat productivity. High-frequency and survey-based indicators for the manufacturing and services sectors suggest some slowdown in the pace of activity. In the services sector, growth of foreign tourist arrivals and international air passenger traffic decelerated in recent months. However, indicators of the construction sector such as consumption of steel and production of cement continued to show healthy growth, though growth in cement production was lower in November 2018.

81. Overall financing conditions have been improving, with bank credit growth in double digits and the total flow of resources to the commercial sector significantly higher than a year ago. Credit flows to services (such as non-banking financial companies, transport operators and trade) and in the personal loans category, especially housing, have been robust. However, credit growth has yet to become broad-based. Credit flows to industry, in particular, have been anaemic; credit to micro and small industry contracted in December 2018, while credit to large industry expanded at a moderate pace.

82. Global growth is also losing traction amidst lingering trade tensions and uncertainty around Brexit. On the positive side, crude oil prices remain soft, though the benefit for net exports could be restricted due to slowing global demand. GDP growth for 2019-20 is projected at 7.4 per cent – in the range of 7.2-7.4 per cent in H1, and 7.5 per cent in Q3 – with risks evenly balanced.

83. Growth impulses have weakened and there is a need to spur private investment and strengthen private consumption, especially in the wake of slowing global growth. Inflation readings since the December 2018 policy have shown a sharp decline. The overall food outlook remains benign and the headline inflation one-year ahead is projected to remain below the target level of 4 per cent. Risks to inflation at this stage are also broadly balanced around the baseline. Hence, space has opened up for policy action to address the growth concerns in pursuance of the provisions of the RBI Act as amended in 2016. The favourable macroeconomic configuration that is evolving underscores the need to act decisively. The time is opportune to seize the initiative and create a congenial environment for growth to revive and ensure a sustained trajectory. Hence, I vote for a reduction in the policy repo rate by 25 basis points. I also vote for a change in the stance of monetary policy from calibrated tightening to neutral. This change in the stance has been largely factored in by market participants after the December MPC meeting and the post policy press conference. The neutral stance will provide flexibility and the room to address challenges to sustained growth of the Indian economy over the coming months, as long as the inflation outlook remains benign.