60. Since the December monetary policy meeting, food inflation prints have continued to be soft, mainly due to vegetables and fruits witnessing healthy domestic production combined with imports (in some cases). In fact, several food groups are now in deflation, continuing with the momentum of recent food inflation prints that were available at the time of the December policy. Fuel inflation has eased due to a drop in international Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) prices. Headline inflation excluding food and fuel has moderated somewhat due to a fall in crude oil prices and complete waning of central government employees’ House Rent Allowance (HRA) effects; nevertheless, it remains at a highly elevated level, ranging between 5.6-6.2% over the past three prints, with inflation in health and education components showing a spike in December due to unexpected rise in prices of medicines and private tuition costs.

61. The RBI headline inflation projections were already revised substantially downward from October to December by between 40-80 basis points (bps) for different quarters over a 12-month projection horizon. The additional downside surprise relative to December projections has been small, around 10 bps on a quarterly basis. Inflation expectations of households as measured by RBI’s survey (IEH) reveal a softening by 80 bps at 3-month horizon and 130 bps at 12-month horizon, possibly reflecting the adaptive nature of household expectations in response to the softness of recent inflation prints; importantly, they too indirectly confirm the ground reality and revision in inflation perceptions, especially in food and fuel categories.

62. Based on these data and other considerations, RBI’s quarterly inflation projections over the next 12-month horizon have been further revised downward and imply headline inflation steadily rising but remaining below the target rate of 4%.

63. My understanding of composition effects and risks around these projections is as follows:

64. One, inflation excluding food and fuel remains elevated and persistent, so it seems crucial to understand if the sharp increase in momentum observed in health and education components is one-off or not. While it seems reasonable to treat it as one-off for now, if it does sustain then it could push inflation excluding food and fuel into uncomfortable territory. Unfortunately, there is no decisive way to resolve this issue other than to wait for and analyse a few more prints.

65. Second, international Brent crude prices have stabilised in the short run. Nevertheless, it is too early to forget or rule out the wild gyrations from geopolitical risks, as were observed over the past six months. Given our oil imports and the implied current account deficit effects, headline inflation responds particularly adversely to upside risk from crude oil prices.

66. Third, the recent low momentum in food prices is assumed to have a structural component over the next 12-month horizon as there appears to be a supply glut in several food items at both domestic and international levels. Vegetable prices, however, are vulnerable to sudden reversal from their deflationary momentum.

67. More importantly, the assumption of sustained low momentum in food prices leads to a consideration of the risk of agrarian distress. Such distress will necessitate a political-economy response in the form of fiscal support to the agrarian economy in the short run; effects of such fiscal support may play out partly over the next 12 months and partly beyond. Besides stimulating rural demand and restoring rural wages, such a response could get generalised into headline inflation; this could arise, for example, by aggravating the input cost push arising in the financing of the real economy from fiscal and quasi-fiscal financing, especially from national small savings fund (NSSF) into bank deposit rates and from fiscal/quasi-fiscal market borrowings into corporate bond yields. Our counterfactual exercises suggest that such upward pressure on headline inflation would require commensurate policy rate action over the next 12 months.

68. In other words, the assumption of particularly benign food inflation in the short run imparts significant upside risk to the inflation trajectory, at the short- and/or medium-term horizons, from the fiscal adjustments that would be necessary to address resulting agrarian distress and to boost rural demand.

69. Fourth, while inflation expectations have moved downward in the most recent survey, when compared to the December 2017 survey, they remain higher at 3-month horizon. In other words, anchoring of inflation expectations of households is still an ongoing process and it is somewhat early to assume its sustenance going forward based on the most recent adjustment.

70. On balance, I remain concerned about (i) the elevated level of inflation excluding food and fuel; (ii) upward risks that could emanate from oil prices and fiscal implications of sustained food deflation; and, (iii) lack of adequate and sustained downward adjustment in household inflation expectations over the past 12 months.

71. Turning to growth, concerns around global growth, especially in major advanced economies and emerging markets embroiled in tariff wars, have gathered momentum. In response, several central banks have decided to be patient with their rate hike plans and/or have revised growth projections downwards. My assessment is that unless these concerns turn into recessionary risks, they could in fact be positive for the Indian economy as a reduction in aggregate global demand keeps Brent crude oil prices under check.

72. Domestic indicators for economic activity are overall mixed. Overall corporate performance in Q3 of 2018-19 was stable; capacity utilisation – absolute or seasonally-adjusted – has remained robust and close to or above 75 for past two quarters; PMI manufacturing and services continue to remain in expansion mode at healthy levels; and consumer sentiment surveyed by the RBI has improved. The primary weak coincident economic indicators have been auto sales and production. Our internal research suggests that this weakness reflects in part the lagged impact of high fuel prices during Q2 and part of Q3 of 2018-19, an effect that should gradually reverse, as well as due to one-off policy changes such as in emission standards and third-party insurance requirement.

73. Traditional measures of the output gap suggest some opening up, i.e., realised output below the potential output; however, my preferred measure, the finance-neutral output gap, remains positive, i.e., realised output is slightly above the potential output, as it captures the healthy aggregate credit growth and stable stock market performance. This is also consistent with the elevated level of inflation excluding food and fuel.

74. Combining my inflation and growth assessments, and given the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)’s mandate to target headline inflation at 4% on a durable basis while paying attention to growth, I prefer to “take off the helmet” but “stay within the crease”. That is, I vote for a change in the stance from “calibrated tightening” to “neutral” to retain policy flexibility at future dates based on incoming data, but to hold the policy rate at 6.5%. Given the elevated level of inflation excluding food and fuel, our counterfactual exercises do not suggest any room for accommodation; keeping the policy rate at 6.5% under these exercises turns out to be “just right” over the medium term.

75. In my view, a rate cut decision now would be heavily dependent on the assumption of sustained weak momentum of food prices all through the next 12 months, which, as I explained, must be viewed as coincident with significant upside risk from fiscal measures needed to address agrarian distress. It seems better to me, in times of presently healthy levels of growth, to wait till the next policy by when uncertainties I have highlighted, especially around one-off surprises in health and education inflation, oil prices, and global recessionary risks, could resolve. The growth print for Q3 would also be available by then for understanding any soft spots in the domestic real economy and their drivers.

76. Finally, recall that I did vote for a rate cut in August 2017; at that point of time, all components of inflation had experienced downward trends, upside risks to inflation had reduced, and growth was weaker. That constellation of parameters gave me greater comfort to cut the policy rate than at the present juncture. Should a similar situation evolve in the next two months, I would have greater clarity for future policy action.