58. After the October 2019 meeting of MPC, the inflation readings of September and October 2019 turned out to be substantially higher, resulting in RBI’s forecast to be higher by 160 bps for the Q3 of 2019-20 with significant upward revisions in the forecast over the next year. Similarly, the estimate of the GDP growth for Q2 of 2019-20 has not only turned out to be 80 bps below but was also contrary to RBI’s assessment that the growth slowdown would bottom out in Q1 of 2019-20. As I had pointed out in my statement in October MPC minutes, the RBI’s forecast of 6.1% growth during the current year was on an optimistic side and would not materialize. Now the RBI has revised its expectation substantially downward to 5%, which seems plausible. The sharp spike in food inflation may continue for the next two-three months driving the headline inflation above the mid-point target and closer to the upper bound of the flexible target range. The forecast of inflation by RBI for the 4 quarters up to Q2 of 2020-21 is based on certain assumptions where considerable uncertainties are involved. I, therefore, take the RBI forecast of the headline inflation of 3.8% for Q2 of 2020-21 with some reservation at this point. Inflationary expectations that were reasonably anchored till recently can shoot up during this period as evident from the RBI Survey of Households and IIMA Survey of Businesses although the situation may not go out of control. Moreover, there are some green shoots of growth recovery during the third and fourth quarters of the current year perhaps in response to the counter-cyclical measures on the fiscal and monetary policy fronts, but they need to be confirmed with more data. I had argued for a 40 bps rate cut in the last policy and I still maintain that there is space for further rate cuts even now. The question is of the timing and magnitude. In my view, it is prudent to wait and watch out for clarity on growth – inflation dynamics and gain some more confidence at this juncture before taking a decisive action on the policy rate front. In the meantime, there is enough slack for the markets to adjust to the rate cuts already made. I, therefore, vote to hold the policy repo rate at 5.15% for now and continue with the accommodative stance. More specific reasons for my vote are as follows –

While the current spike in the headline inflation is arguably due to the temporary supply shocks on the food front, the impact is not confined only to a few items. It is important to understand how much would be the impact and for how long. The household inflationary expectations as per the latest RBI survey showed a sharp increase by 120 bps and 180 bps for three months and twelve months ahead horizon. Thus, the surveyed households believe that the increased inflation is not a temporary phenomenon but can go on increasing over the whole of the year to come. On the other hand, IIM Ahmedabad Survey of Businesses shows an increase of only 10 bps in their inflationary expectation 12 months ahead indicating that the current spike is temporary. RBI’s own forecasts support the latter, but they are based on some crucial assumptions, which are surrounded by several uncertainties. Clarity on this with more data is important.

My own research with a co-author published in the Economic and Political Weekly on 3rd March 2018 shows that as per recent inflation dynamics the second round effects of an external shock (like food or fuel prices) on the core inflation are, if at all, quite weak. Unlike in the past, it is the headline inflation that now reverts to the core rather than the core reverting to the headline. RBI’s recent survey on consumer confidence provides some support to this argument. It has shown that in response to the sharp rise in the food prices, the consumption of the non-essential items has declined implying very low substitutability between food and non-food consumption. It may, therefore, be argued that inflationary expectations based largely on food inflation may not result in a rise in the core inflation. We may, however, need some more observations to confirm or contradict this argument.

Although the capacity utilization as per the early results of RBI survey has fallen substantially to less than 70% in Q2 of 2019-20, there are several green shoots of growth recovery in the economy. PMI in manufacturing as well as services has shown substantial increase with the latter turning into an expansionary mode from the earlier contraction. RBI survey has shown that corporates have turned investors from savers earlier. After a long time, corporates are increasing their physical assets and not financial assets. Transmission of rate cuts in the credit markets is picking up and with the policy of external benchmark for lending rates, it is likely to further pick up. RBI’s own forecast suggests that the growth slowdown has bottomed out in Q2 of 2019-20 and gradual recovery would take place in Q3 and Q4 and continue in the next year. High frequency data and advance estimates of GDP for the current year need to be watched carefully to examine the extent and speed of this recovery since it can have implications for the headline inflation.

Union Budget for 2020-21 and the Economic Survey for 2019-20 are due in the next couple of months. As I have argued earlier, the growth recovery has to be addressed fundamentally and durably by the fiscal policy with the monetary policy, if at all, playing only a facilitating role. The stance, content and commitment of the fiscal measures outlined in the Budget and the Economic Survey should, therefore, provide extremely useful guidance on the growth concerns. In my opinion, monetary policy should supplement those efforts provided inflation risks are contained within the given target range. In this context, I would like to repeat my earlier arguments on the concerns about fiscal slippage. When there is a cyclical downturn due to serious growth slowdown, it is logical to expect a fiscal slippage even without any change in the fiscal policy parameters. If the estimates of nominal income growth are seriously undershot, revenues are bound to fall short of the target. If under such circumstances, expenditures are cut to maintain the fiscal deficit target, it would amount to a contractionary fiscal policy during a downturn!! Generally, the stabilization policies like fiscal and monetary policies should be counter-cyclical and not pro-cyclical. The fiscal discipline target of 3% of GDP under such circumstances should not be overemphasized and can be temporarily ignored. Even though the N.K. Singh Committee has provided for a slippage by 50 bps under such exigencies, there is hardly any rationale for only 50 bps slippage. In my opinion, therefore, the slippage of more than 50 basis points may also be justified under the present circumstances. It is important in my opinion to wait for the clarity of the government’s commitment and action to tackle the growth slowdown before further action on the monetary front at present.

59. Given all these arguments, it is pragmatic to wait for more clarity to emerge for a firm action on policy rate. In the meantime, the expected better transmission of the past rate cuts will serve the purpose in any case. The stance should continue to be accommodative but in this policy, we should hold the repo rate at 5.15%.