45. Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, increased from 3.3% in August and 4% in September 2019 to 4.6% in October. Food inflation increased from 4.7% in September to 6.9% in October, mainly due to an increase in inflation in vegetables, fruits, pulses, milk and cereals. Inflation excluding food and fuel moderated to 3.4% in October from 4.2% in September, reflecting favourable base effects, as well as softening domestic demand.

46. Looking forward, inflation expectations of households, as captured through RBI’s Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, increased in the November 2019 round, compared to the September round, by 120 basis points for the three-month-ahead horizon and by 180 basis points for the one-year-ahead horizon, possibly due to the sharp increase in food prices. At the same time, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) shows an expectation of subdued selling prices of manufacturing in Q4:2019-20, as well as reduced input cost pressures.

47. The increase in prices of vegetables is expected to continue in the near future, but moderate by February 2020 due to higher arrivals in the late kharif and subsequently from the rabi season, as well as measures taken by the government to augment the supply through imports.

48. On the output side, GDP growth fell for the sixth consecutive quarter to 4.5% (y-o-y) in Q2:2019-20 from 5% in the previous quarter. Growth in private final consumption expenditures was 5.1%, up from 3.1% in the previous quarter, and growth in government final consumption expenditure increased to 15.6%, while growth in gross capital formation slowed sharply. Excluding government final consumption expenditure, GDP growth is 3.1%, underlining the weakness in private domestic demand. Growth in GVA also fell to 4.3% in Q2:2019-20, pulled down by manufacturing sliding into contractionary territory, as well as moderation in services.

49. Turning to survey data, early results of RBI’s Order Books, Inventory and Capacity Utilisation Survey (OBICUS) suggest a drop in capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector. The Business Assessment Index (a composite of demand indicators), based on the early results of the RBI’s Industrial Outlook Survey for the manufacturing sector, remained in the contractionary zone for Q3:2019-20. According to RBI’s Consumer Confidence Survey, the Current Situation Index and the Future Expectations Index both dropped in the November 2019 round, implying lower current activity and a less optimistic outlook. Meanwhile, the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index increased from 50.6 in October to 51.2 in November, reflecting an increase in new orders and output.

50. Thus, overall, private consumption and investment activity are weak, and business and consumer sentiment are somewhat downbeat. Further, exports growth has contracted by less than imports growth, indicating that the slowdown in domestic demand may be somewhat more acute than the weakness in global growth.

51. On the international front, some signs of a cyclical upturn in global industrial growth are now in sight. Industrial growth prospects have improved for both France and Germany, although the US industrial outlook remains subdued. The outlook for the Chinese economy remains constrained, while Japan is flirting with recessionary conditions. Overall, the global economy is expected to experience uneven improvement in economic growth in the next few months, according to Economic Cycle Research Institute’s (ECRI’s) international leading indexes. However, the world’s largest economies are in no position to act as locomotives to pull global growth out of the doldrums, and will therefore not be able to provide much impetus to the Indian economy. Thus, the drivers of growth for the Indian economy would have to be from within the economy. Meanwhile, growth in ECRI’s Indian Coincident Index looks to have bottomed, having improved modestly of late.

52. On the domestic front, from the monetary policy perspective, monetary transmission of the cumulative reduction in the policy repo rate by 135 basis points from February to October 2019 to the various money and corporate debt markets has been in the range of 137 basis points in the overnight call money market to 218 basis points in 3-month CPs of non-banking finance companies. Transmission to the government securities market has been partial at 113 basis points for 5-year government securities and 89 basis points for 10-year government securities. The weighted average lending rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans sanctioned by banks fell by 44 basis points during this period. Going forward, the recent linking of the lending rate to external benchmarking is expected to expedite the pending transmission, with most banks having linked their lending rates to the policy repo rate.

53. Further, to reiterate what I said in the last policy, the policy heavy-lifting to reverse the growth slowdown has to be a multi-pronged approach. In this regard, a number of measures have already been undertaken by the government with a focus on reviving growth. These include steps to relax norms for FDI, focus on seamless tax administration, improve ease of doing business, consolidate public sector banks, and encourage the flow of credit from the banking sector to the financial and real economy sectors. The government has also undertaken fiscal stimulus in the form of a major overhaul in corporate income tax aimed at reducing the overall tax burden on corporates and, in turn, improving India's global competitiveness. Such measures should help to improve the investment climate and attract more capital flows into India.

54. At the same time, lacklustre revenue collections, alongside lower nominal GDP growth rate add to the risk of fiscal slippage. Thus, at this juncture, it would be prudent to take a cue from the upcoming Budget on the government’s initiatives to revive growth.

55. Thus, with the pending monetary transmission expected to be realised in the near future, measures already undertaken by the government to address the growth slowdown expected to play out, and growth initiatives expected to be announced in the upcoming Budget, there is merit in a wait-and-watch approach to see how these measures pan out and impact real economic activity, including investment, going forward.

56. At the same time, while growth is slowing, headline inflation is projected to rise in the near-term, but moderate to below target by Q2:2020-21. At this juncture, it is, therefore, best to monitor incoming data on both inflation and growth.

57. I, therefore, vote to keep the policy rate unchanged and continue with the accommodative stance.