32. Inflationary expectations are important in driving actual inflation. Since the last review, there has been a sharp spike in both the 3-month ahead (by 120 bps) inflationary expectations from 8% to 9.2% and 1-year ahead (by 180 bps) inflationary expectations from 8.1% to 9.9%.

33. Such a sharp increase has not been seen in the past three years. Even the 3- month ahead trimmed mean (from 8.7% to 9.7%) and one year ahead trimmed mean (8.6% to 9.9%) have increased. While these trends may be adaptively reflecting the rise in food inflation, they also may possibly reflect the rise in economic policy uncertainty in the current growth climate.

34. October food inflation printed at 6.9% which is a 39-month high. The cumulative momentum in food between April-October FY:19-20 is higher than that in the previous three financial years. Unseasonal rainfall has led to both a damage to Kharif output and to a delay in the sowing of the Rabi crop. This is building into price pressures. While some of the impulses could be idiosyncratic, it may also be that food surprises sustain going forward. For instance, the cumulative momentum of food excluding vegetables by October was higher this financial year. I have been concerned about the trajectory of food inflation in the last several reviews.

35. Headline inflation at 4.6% printed at a 16-month high. In contrast, inflation excluding food and fuel, moderated by 80 bps from 4.2% in September to 3.4% in October. Inflation excluding food and fuel still indicates relatively soft cumulative momentum so far in FY:2019-20, reflecting lacklustre demand in the economy. The price build up in services has also remained soft in groups such as housing, health, and education, which has helped contribute to low momentum in inflation excluding food and fuel. Low service sector inflation however is unlikely to sustain. This is because the service sector in India tends to be heavily supply constrained.

36. Economic growth continues to be lacklustre. Growth in Q2: FY19-20 fell further to 4.5%, the lowest in 26 quarters with investment growing at 1%. The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) continued to be in contraction in September (-4.3%) compared to -1.4% in August. The weakness in the IIP was manifest across all segments. The truncated IIP also contracted by -5.5% in September. Based on RBI’s Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS), demand conditions remained pessimistic in Q3: FY 19-20.

37. Despite lacklustre growth, and rising inflation, I think monetary policy is in a good place right now.

38. There are mitigating factors that would suggest that it is best to obtain greater clarity on the evolving growth-inflation risk picture.

39. First, counter-cyclical monetary policy has not been as effective as expected due to inadequate monetary policy transmission. Weak monetary transmission is one of the factors that has resulted in the poor macroeconomic equilibrium the economy is currently in and it could lead to excesses in the financial sector.

40. Transmission will no doubt improve with external benchmarking as the proportion of loans linked to the MCLR falls and more loans become linked to the external benchmark. Further, reducing risk aversion in the NBFC sector, problems in which have led to elevated term premia, is more in the domain of “macro-prudential policy”, rather than monetary policy.

41. Second, a few positive factors have emerged since the last review. This suggests that a wait and watch approach is appropriate.

42. First, the WALR on fresh rupee loans has fallen by 44 bps (from 29 bps in the last review). A large quantum of rate cuts has still not been transmitted, and the MPC loses nothing by waiting for a couple of months. Second, net FDI into India, at 20.9 Billion USD between April-September 2019 continues to be strong. Third, within exports, the share of sectors recording negative growth has reduced to 38.2% in October 2019. Fourth, in October, some high frequency indicators have begun to contribute to a positive momentum in growth, suggesting that it is best to wait for a few months to see whether the slowdown has bottomed out or not. Fifth, it is best to wait to see how the corporate tax cuts have impacted the economy. Since the tax cut was announced on September 20, and RBI’s analysis of corporate performance corresponded to the end of September, this data did not pick up the effects of the tax cut. Further, the corporate tax cut for new companies will only apply after October 1. Sixth, the large decline in capacity utilization (CU) to 68.9% in Q2: FY 19-20 based on early results of Order Books, Inventory and Capacity Utilisation Survey, needs further clarification. Importantly, using sentiments on CU in the IOS, Q3: FY 19-20 is forecasted to improve somewhat. Seventh, consumption expenditure (PFCE) growth has strengthened to a little over 5% in Q2: FY 19-20 from 3.1% in Q1: FY19-20 which is noteworthy notwithstanding the deflator effect. Eighth, the PMI in both manufacturing and services has strengthened in their most recent readings. Ninth, the risk environment in the global economy appears to have abated a bit suggesting that global recession risks seem to have waned.

43. I worry however that real wage growth in the organized sector has further weakened since the last review. In the rural sector, weak demand conditions add to the prospect of a “one-legged” recovery driven by the urban sector.

44. I vote to pause. I also vote to retain the stance as accommodative. I will remain data dependant, going forward; further monetary policy action will depend on the evolving growth-inflation dynamics.