49. In the MPC meeting of December 2018, I had argued that given the sudden favourable changes in the macroeconomic environment during November 2018 and their magnitude, it was the most opportune time for the MPC to cut the policy rate. However, because the MPC had insistently changed its stance from neutral to calibrated tightening with a 5:1 majority vote only in the previous meeting of October stating explicitly that any rate cuts were off the table, it would not be appropriate to cut the rate in the December 2018 policy. My strong plea to change the stance to neutral was also not accepted by my other colleagues in the MPC, though it was made clear in the subsequent communication that in future the MPC could consider a rate cut if the upside risk to inflation did not materialize. The subsequent two prints of monthly CPI headline inflation for November and December 2018, which are now available, confirm that the upside risks have considerably subdued with the predicted inflation over the next 3-4 quarters coming down further. On the other hand, there are concerns about the GDP growth slowing down, which is reflected in the marginal reduction in the RBI’s growth forecast. Therefore, it would be appropriate to consider a rate cut not only to correct the past inaction but also provide impetus to growth without materially risking inflation beyond the targeted 4 percent. Under these circumstances, I think space has opened up for a substantial rate cut of about 50 to 60 bps going forward. There is, therefore, an immediate need to change the stance formally from calibrated tightening to neutral and cut the policy rate by 25 bps to begin with. More specific reasons for my vote are as follows:

The implicit volatility in the oil prices was unusually high during November 2018, but now, during December 2018 and particularly January 2019, has significantly come down to almost its long-term average. There is an expectation of oil prices stabilizing at current levels of about $ 60 - $ 65 per barrel. The risks of significant overshooting on a sustained basis have substantially receded.

Food prices are likely to remain subdued over the next 3-4 quarters as per the detailed exercise of forecast undertaken by the RBI staff in consultation with the subject matter experts.

Inflation ex-food and fuel is also predicted to fall from its current level of about 5.9 percent in Q3 of 2018-19 to about 5.1 percent in Q3 of 2019-20. It may fall even more if the current spike in health and education price index turns out to be only one off phenomenon. Thus, the core (or ex-food and fuel) inflation also shows a declining trend. This is quite consistent with the finding of my study with a co-author published in EPW (March 03, 2018) that persistence of core inflation is coming down in India perhaps because the inflation targeting regime in India has resulted in anchoring of people’s inflationary expectations and as a result the core inflation is also declining.

As a result of all this, the headline inflation forecast one year ahead by RBI staff has turned out to be less than the target of 4 percent for the first time. With the policy rate of 6.5 percent, this implies the real policy rate of about 2.6 percent, which is one of the highest in the world as I have been arguing. We do not need such a high real policy rate. It only discourages private investment and impedes growth and employment. There is an urgent need to correct the situation by bringing down the real policy rate to a more reasonable and acceptable level particularly when the expected inflation 3-4 quarters ahead is within the target of 4 percent.

It is important to note that the inflationary expectations in the economy have also been falling now at least for the last three survey rounds. Median household inflationary expectations 3 and 12 months ahead in the RBI surveys have shown considerable decline of about 120 and 130 bps and business expectations of headline CPI inflation 12 months ahead in the IIMA surveys have shown 53 bps decline. Moreover, the absolute number in the latter is 3.8 percent, which is almost the same as the RBI forecast. This provides more comfort for our quantitative assessment going forward.

Recently announced budget of the Central Government shows no fiscal slippage from the path of fiscal and debt consolidation during 2018-19 when we consider the first revised estimates of GDP published on 31st January 2019. The slippage during 2019-20 without additional resource mobilization (since it was an interim budget) also turns out to be less than 20 bps from the fiscal consolidation path. In all probability, in the regular budget to be presented after the general election, such a minor gap may be covered with additional resource mobilization. It may not, therefore, have any significant inflationary impact on the economy and a very limited impact on the real interest rates in the system. With the institutional reforms in the recent past, significant fiscal slippage from the states side taking place is also not very likely.

With the latest revisions in the GDP and unemployment estimates over the recent past there is a need to have a serious relook at the estimates of potential output and potential output growth in the economy. My views expressed earlier on the issue and estimates given by renowned scholars with rich policy making experience in the country need to be considered seriously. Accordingly, the potential output growth for the Indian economy going forward seems to be in the range of 8 to 8.5 percent and not 7 to 7.5 percent as was implicitly assumed now for quite some time. If we consider this more plausible estimate, the output gap is widening rather than closing. Generally, as the economic policy reforms are implemented, the potential output growth rises because it opens up new opportunities for productivity growth and efficiency. The current marginal downward revision in the growth forecast for the next 3-4 quarters, therefore, suggests that a substantial output gap is likely to open up exercising downward pressure on wage growth and inflation.

The experience of this MPC corroborates a negative correlation between the real policy rate (as measured by the excess of the actual policy rate over the projected inflation one year ahead at the time of the policy announcement) and the real GDP growth. One cannot reject the hypothesis that the recent slowdown in the real GDP growth in India is on account of high real policy rates among other factors. If so, now is the ripe time to correct the real interest rates and create policy space for future actions if required.

50. Given all these reasons, in my view this is the time to act decisively by changing the stance from calibrated tightening to neutral and cutting the policy rate by 25 bps to begin with. The future rate actions may be data driven particularly with respect to the target of 4 percent headline inflation sustaining over time and the direction and magnitude of output gap.