45. Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, fell from 3.2% in June 2019 to 3.1% in July but rose back to 3.2% in August. Food inflation increased from 2.4% in June to 3% in August, mainly due to an increase in inflation in vegetables, pulses, and elevated inflation in meat and fish. Inflation excluding food and fuel rose from 4.1% in June to 4.5% in July, partly reflecting the increase in prices of petrol and diesel, but softened to 4.2% in August.

46. Looking forward, inflation expectations of households, as captured through RBI’s Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, increased in the September 2019 round, compared to the July round, by 40 basis points for the three-months-ahead horizon and by 20 basis points for the one-year-ahead horizon, possibly due to the recent increase in food prices. At the same time, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) shows an expectation of selling prices of manufacturing being muted in Q3:2019-20. Further, according to Economic Cycle Research Institute’s (ECRI) Indian Future Inflation Gauge, which is a predictor of the direction of future inflation, inflation pressures remain contained.

47. Thus, while the actual inflation scenario and the outlook for inflation seem benign, some upside risks are prevalent, such as the possibility of supply disruptions in the global crude oil market.

48. On the output side, GDP growth fell for the fifth consecutive quarter to 5% in Q1:2019-20 from 5.8% in the previous quarter. Growth in private final consumption expenditure dropped to an 18-quarter low of 3.1% in the same period, while growth in gross capital formation remained muted at 3.7%. Growth in GVA also fell to 4.9% in Q1:2019-20 from 5.7% in Q4:2018-19, mainly due to a moderation in manufacturing growth and stalling of construction activity.

49. Industrial activity recorded moderate growth, with growth in IIP increasing from 1.2% in June to 4.3% in July, and with sub-indices for mining and quarrying, manufacturing and electricity registering positive growth, although growth in electricity slowed. Use based classification, however, indicates continuing deceleration in capital goods. Consumer non-durables accelerated for the fourth consecutive month, while for consumer durables, growth remained negative, although there was some improvement with growth rising from (-) 10.2% in June to (-) 2.7% in July. High frequency indicators of rural demand – tractor and motorcycle sales – and of urban demand – passenger vehicle sales – continued to contract. Growth in the index of eight core industries also fell in August.

50. Turning to survey data, RBI’s Order Books, Inventory and Capacity Utilisation Survey (OBICUS) suggests a drop in capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector to 73.6% in Q1:2019-20 from 76.1% in the previous quarter, while seasonally adjusted capacity utilisation increased marginally to 74.8% in Q1 from 74.5% in Q4:2018-19. RBI’s Industrial Outlook Survey for the manufacturing sector shows a decline in the Business Assessment Index (a composite of demand indicators) for Q2:2019-20. The corresponding Business Expectations Index suggests that demand conditions are also expected to deteriorate in Q3:2019-20. According to RBI’s Consumer Confidence Survey, the Current Situation Index and the Future Expectations Index both dropped in the September round, implying lower current activity and a less optimistic outlook. Meanwhile, the manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index remained unchanged in September from the previous month, while the services PMI fell in September.

51. Thus, private consumption and investment activity are weak, and business and consumer sentiment are somewhat downbeat.

52. On the global front, the U.S. economic growth outlook is increasingly getting weaker, especially in manufacturing, and job growth prospects have dimmed. This boosts the probability of more Fed rate cuts this year. The overall global growth outlook also remains downcast, according to ECRI’s 20-Country Long Leading Index. In particular, Japan’s latest sales tax hike risks tipping the economy into its fifth recession since 2008. Meanwhile, Chinese economic growth is likely to languish. According to ECRI’s Chinese Leading Industrial Production Index, this is especially true in the industrial sector, hurting supplier countries like Germany, which is heavily reliant on exports to China. At the same time, industrial growth seems to have hit bottom in France and Italy earlier this year.

53. Nevertheless, in the context of largely gloomy international growth prospects, ECRI’s Indian Leading Exports Index growth rate remains in a cyclical downswing, suggesting that Indian export growth will stay weak. Thus, the global scenario is not likely to provide impetus to domestic growth.

54. With respect to transmission, between February and August 2019, the cumulative reduction in the policy repo rate has been 110 basis points, much of which is yet to be transmitted, although the financial markets have taken cognizance. While the importance of transmitting existing rate cuts before committing to fresh ones cannot be overstated, the recent linking of lending rates to external benchmarks is expected to expedite the process.

55. Of course, the policy heavy-lifting to reverse the growth slowdown has to be a multi-pronged approach. In this regard, there is a welcome delivery of a number of measures undertaken by the government since the last policy meeting with a focus on reviving growth. Among largely fiscal-neutral measures, the government has taken steps to relax norms for FDI, focus on seamless tax administration, improve ease of doing business, consolidate public sector banks, and encourage the flow of credit from the banking sector to the NBFCs and real economy sectors. The government has also undertaken fiscal stimulus in the form of a major overhaul in corporate income tax aimed at reducing the overall tax burden on corporates and in turn improving India's global competitiveness.

56. Given the measures undertaken by the government to address the growth slowdown, as well as the pending transmission of monetary policy, there is merit in a wait-and-watch approach to see how these measures pan out and impact real economy activity, going forward. At the same time, given the slowdown in growth on the domestic and global fronts, along with benign headline inflation and the expectation that it will remain below target, there is policy space to further cut the policy repo rate to boost domestic growth, within the flexible inflation targeting mandate.

57. Thus, on balance, the growth-inflation dynamics call for another 25 basis points cut, bringing the cumulative easing this year to 135 basis points. I therefore vote for a policy rate cut of 25 basis points. I also vote to keep the stance as accommodative.