45. India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in Q4:2018-19 decelerated sharply to a 20-quarter low of 5.8%, mainly due to a decline in the growth of gross fixed capital formation to 3.6% and moderation in growth of private consumption expenditure to 7.2%. While growth in government consumption expenditure was upbeat at 13.1% in Q4:2018-19, GDP growth for FY2019 was revised to a five-year low of 6.8%. Further, growth in agriculture turned negative (-0.1%) in Q4:2018-19 for the first time since Q3:2015-16, although services remained resilient. In addition, y-o-y growth in the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) decelerated in the months of January and February, followed by negative growth (-0.1%) in March. This was accompanied by negative growth in manufacturing (with 78% weight in IIP) in February and March. The use-based classification shows a declining trend in capital goods and consumer durables. Furthermore, high frequency indicators such as passenger vehicle sales, tractors and motorcycle sales suggest a slowdown in urban and rural demand. On the external front, growth in merchandise exports and imports has slowed, with exports witnessing a sharper deceleration, reflecting the slowdown in global demand, trade tensions and global uncertainties.

46. Meanwhile, the Purchasing Managers’ Index increased in May due to an expansion in output, new orders and employment. Further, RBI’s Business Expectations Index of the Industrial Outlook Survey for manufacturing anticipates modest improvement in Q2:2019-20. The OBICUS Survey (Order Books, Inventory and Capacity Utilisation Survey) conducted by RBI suggests a seasonal rise in capacity utilisation in Q4:2018-19. RBI’s Consumer Confidence Indices – Current Situation Index and Future Expectations Index – on the other hand, reflect a drop in the May round compared to the previous March round, implying lower current activity and a less optimistic outlook. On the brighter side, higher financial flows should enhance investment.

47. Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, remained at its March level of 2.9% in April, with increase in food and fuel inflation partly offset by the broad-based decline of CPI inflation excluding the food and fuel groups. Trends from surveys provided mixed signals. Inflation expectations of consumers, as captured through RBI’s Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, showed a decline for the three-month-ahead horizon by 20 basis points but were unchanged for the one-year-ahead horizon. At the same time, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) showed an expectation of rising input costs in the upcoming quarter (Q2:2019-20). Going forward, upside risks to inflation include continuation of the uptick in food price inflation, uncertainties relating to monsoon, volatility in international oil prices, materialization of industry expectations of cost pressures as per the IOS and lastly, potential fiscal slippage.

48. Looking at the international scenario, a revival in global economic growth remains elusive, with the Economic Cycle Research Institute’s (ECRI) 20-Country Long Leading Index growth rate staying near its lowest reading in almost three years. Also, US economic growth is set to slow, while an inflation cycle downturn is poised to persist, given the decline in ECRI’s U.S. Future Inflation Gauge (a harbinger of inflation) to its lowest reading in over three years. Meanwhile, with ECRI’s Global Leading Manufacturing Index growth staying near a seven-year low, the global industrial growth outlook remains dismal. Of particular concern is that growth in ECRI’s Chinese Leading Industrial Production Index, which leads Chinese PMI data, slipped in its latest reading toward its recent multiyear low. This is the cyclical context of the recent escalation of its trade war with the US.

49. The gloomy global scenario also highlights the fact that India cannot rely on external engines of growth in the current circumstances. Thus, an internal boost to demand would be the preferable option. In the last two MPC meetings (February and April), the repo rate was cut by 25 basis points in each meeting. The transmission of these policy rate cuts of 50 bps to the weighted average lending rate (WALR) was 21 bps on fresh rupee loans. On the other hand, the WALR on outstanding loans increased by 4 bps, since past loans are priced at high rates. At the same time, longer tenor money market instruments were generally aligned with the weighted average call money rate (WACR), implying reasonable transmission of the reduction in the policy rate. In other words, while the transmission is not complete, its impact is visible.

50. Thus, given the deceleration in growth and in the context of projected headline inflation remaining below the target in 2019-20, I vote for a rate cut of 25 bps. To reinforce this, in an attempt to boost sentiment, I also vote to change the stance from neutral to accommodative.