60. The configuration of macroeconomic and financial conditions facing the MPC in this meeting exerts conflicting pulls. Arguably, the slump in real GDP growth warrants accommodative monetary policy actions and stance whereas the upturn in headline inflation for the third month in succession after a quiescent phase of nine months calls for an opposite response or at least status quo until there is ground to infer that the food price spirals that are driving it are on the ebb.

61. In this context, two features of the recent upsurge in inflation weigh upon the monetary policy decision. First, it is prudent to expect higher than current readings over the next two or three months. This warrants a pause in the sequence of rate reductions that began in February 2019. Second, inflation pressures are rotating from vegetable prices to those of other elements of food and beverages. By current reckoning, vegetables prices can be expected to reverse by Q4:2019-20 as the supply situation improves. They can, therefore, be looked through while setting monetary policy. The key question is: will the upside in other food prices reverse or persist, especially those of pulses and milk? If it persists, will it spill over into non-food inflation? This too warrants close monitoring of incoming data over the next few months and, therefore, a pause.

62. Turning to the real economy, the weakness in overall activity may likely prolong into Q3, if not turn weaker. In particular, the sharp downturn in the growth of investment calls for urgent policy responses, reinforcing the actions already taken. The contribution of monetary policy in this endeavour can be to reduce the cost of capital. To bring about the turnaround, however, the net present value of future income streams from investment must exceed the cost of capital. This will hinge around a rekindling of animal spirits in a business-conducive environment, highlighting the importance of close and continuous policy coordination. Monetary policy has been pre-emptive in supporting growth and is committed to remaining in accommodative mode until growth revives. With 135 basis points of interest rate reductions and fiscal policy actions working their way into the economy, it is apposite in this meeting to allow this pass-through and be in readiness to back signs of traction with resolute and calibrated policy actions.

63. While voting for status quo in this meeting, it is important to note that headroom is available to act and arrest any further weakening of growth impulses. With this objective in the fore, I also vote for maintaining the accommodative monetary policy stance.