70. Economic activity has continued to weaken with GDP growth decelerating for the sixth consecutive quarter for Q2:2019-20. Of the two main components of GDP, while investment activity weakened further, private consumption showed signs of recovery. CPI inflation has surged in last three consecutive months reflecting a spike in vegetable prices and price pressures in some other food items. However, inflation excluding food and fuel glided below four per cent, suggesting subdued domestic demand conditions. Global economic activity has remained weak, weighed down by continuing uncertainty relating to trade conflicts. Major central banks have maintained accommodative monetary policy stances.

71. Headline inflation rose sharply in September and further in October, driven up by a sudden spike in prices of vegetables as kharif crop was damaged due to unseasonal rains in many parts of the country; increase in prices of onion was particularly sharp. Prices of certain non-vegetable foods items such as pulses, cereals, fruits and sugar increased at a faster pace than in previous two years. On the whole, food group inflation was at a 39-month high in October. Fuel group inflation remained in deflation for the fourth consecutive month in October mainly due to continuing deflation in LPG prices. Electricity prices, however, picked up in many states.

72. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel moderated to an all-time low of 3.4 per cent in October. Apart from the strong favourable base effect, price increases also moderated in several services such as transport fares, telephone charges, tuition fees, recreation and amusement and house rentals. Inflation expectations of households polled in the last round of the survey conducted by the Reserve Bank, however, increased sharply for both the 3-month ahead and 12-month ahead horizons, possibly reflecting the sharp rise in food prices. CPI inflation is projected to rise to 5.1-4.7 per cent for H2:2019-20 before moderating to 4.0-3.8 per cent for H1:2020-21.

73. Turning to economic activity, GDP growth decelerated to 4.5 per cent for Q2:2019-20 from 5.0 per cent in Q1; the Reserve Bank had projected GDP growth for Q2 at 5.3 per cent in its October policy. Though growth in private consumption recovered to 5.1 per cent in Q2 from 3.1 per cent in Q1, it needs to be seen whether it will be sustained. Government final consumption expenditure surged to provide a strong support to economic activity, in the absence of which growth would have been still lower. On the supply side, manufacturing activity contracted. Early results of the order books, inventory and capacity utilisation (OBICUS) survey conducted by the Reserve Bank suggest that capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector declined to 68.9 per cent in Q2:2019-20 from 73.6 per cent in Q1. Services sector activity also moderated, despite a pick up in growth in public administration, defence and other services (PADO).

74. Beyond Q2, however, some positive signs have emerged. Rabi sowing has caught up considerably from the setback caused by delay in kharif harvesting and unseasonal rainfall in October and early November. Storage in major reservoirs at 86 per cent of the full reservoir level as on November 28 was much higher as compared with 61 per cent a year ago. This augurs well for the rabi season. While the output of eight core industries contracted in October, PMI manufacturing increased to 51.2 in November from 50.6 in October. Certain high frequency indicators of the services sector showed positive growth in October/November vis-à-vis September. Passenger vehicle sales, domestic and international air passenger traffic, foreign tourist arrivals, and finished steel consumption showed higher growth in October in comparison with the previous month. Though commercial vehicle and two-wheeler sales contracted in October, the pace of contraction slowed down. The PMI for services, which was in contraction in October (49.2), moved into expansion zone to 52.7 in November. Real GDP growth for 2019-20 has been revised downwards from 6.1 per cent in the October policy to 5.0 per cent – 4.9-5.5 per cent in H2:2019-20; GDP growth has been projected at 5.9-6.3 per cent for H1:2020-21. While improved monetary transmission and a quick resolution of global trade tensions could push the growth above the projected trajectory, a delay in revival of domestic demand, a further slowdown in global economic activity and geo-political tensions could pull it down below the projected path.

75. Monetary transmission has been full and almost instantaneous across various money market segments and private corporate bond yields, while the transmission to the government securities market has been partial. Despite some improvement in the recent period, monetary transmission to lending rates of banks remains inadequate. The 1-year median marginal cost of funds-based lending rate (MCLR) declined by 49 basis points during February-November 2019. The weighted average lending rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans sanctioned by banks declined by 44 basis points during February-October 2019, while the WALR on outstanding rupee loans increased by 2 basis points during the same period. With the introduction of the external benchmark system, transmission is expected to improve going forward as the existing MCLR-based floating rate loans, which typically have annual resets, become due for renewal. Overall liquidity in the system remains in sizable surplus. The weighted average term deposit rate declined by 9 bps in October and 16 basis points during February-October 2019. This bodes well for transmission to lending rates.

76. Overall, several uncertainties cloud the growth-inflation outlook. First, the surge in food inflation in last three months, driven up by a spike in onion and other vegetable prices, could be transitory. It is likely to reverse gradually as late kharif output comes to the market. In view of this, even as current food price spike driven by vegetables can be looked through, there is a need for greater clarity as to how the overall food inflation path is going to evolve, as there is some uncertainty about the outlook of prices of certain non-vegetable food items such as cereals, pulses, milk and sugar. It is also not clear at this stage as to how the recent increase in telecom charges will play out even as CPI inflation excluding food and fuel has moderated.

77. Second, though domestic demand conditions have weakened, certain high frequency indicators have improved in the more recent period. There are also some indications that the capex cycle may be turning up as reflected in (i) an increase in the share of funds deployed in fixed assets to 45.6 per cent during H1:2019-20 from 18.9 per cent during H1:2018-19, based on the results of 1539 listed private manufacturing companies; and (ii) an increase in total cost of projects sanctioned in the private sector by banks/financial institutions to ₹ 79,525 crore in Q2:2019-20 from ₹ 45,781 crore in Q1. These are positive developments but need to be carefully assessed with incoming data for their sustainability.

78. Third, monetary transmission has improved in recent months. The impact of past policy rate reductions on monetary transmission, however, is still unfolding.

79. Fourth, the impact of recent counter-cyclical measures taken by the Government is playing out. The next budget is due for presentation in about two months and it will provide greater clarity about the further measures that the Government may initiate. It is imperative that monetary and fiscal policies work in close coordination.

80. Fifth, global financial markets have remained volatile caused by trade related uncertainties.

81. Considering all these aspects in their totality, on balance, I vote for keeping the policy repo rate on hold at the present level of 5.15 per cent in this meeting and for maintaining the accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive growth, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target. There is policy space, the use of which, however, needs to be appropriately timed for ensuring its optimal impact.

