61. “Why do old men wake so early? Is it to have one longer day?” wonders Santiago, the old fisherman, in “Old Man and the Sea” by Ernest Hemingway. I found myself preparing and writing these minutes early too, perhaps so I could have one longer drafting day!

62. Since the April 2019 meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), inflation prints have been more or less consistent with RBI’s projections. Food inflation has risen more than expected, driven significantly by a seasonal summer uptick in vegetable prices. In contrast, inflation excluding food and fuel (ex-food-fuel) has registered a significant broad-based decline of 90 basis points (bps); this was both unexpected and unusually large in magnitude over a short period of two months. I have always put significant weight on ex-food-fuel inflation in my assessment of future inflation trajectory as it tends to be the more persistent component of headline inflation and it contains better signals about the underlying aggregate demand pressures. The signal conveyed by substantial softening of ex-food-fuel inflation has only been corroborated by the large negative surprise of the Q4:2018-19 GDP print, pulled down by a sharp deceleration in Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) growth to 3.6%, a 14-quarter low, explained possibly at least in part by a hysteresis effect induced by the pre-election uncertainty.

63. Altogether this led to the following considerations at my end regarding the inflation outlook:

The broad-based decline in ex-food-fuel inflation is the primary contributor to softening of the inflation trajectory at the horizon of 12 months. While the level of ex-food-fuel inflation is presently at 4.5%, the fact that the level of food inflation is relatively low ensures that the headline trajectory over the next twelve months projected by the RBI staff remains below the MPC target of 4%, reaching 3.7% in Q4:2019-20.

Food momentum has picked up significantly; late monsoon and prevailing drought conditions in many states suggest this momentum may sustain beyond just vegetable prices. While vegetable prices show seasonality during April-August that tends to reverse partly during September-March, the reversal pattern is less clear for the food basket as a whole. Nowcast data suggest that momentum in food prices is broad-based in May too, though it has softened from the first fortnight to the second fortnight. Overall, this has imparted an upward push to the food inflation trajectory, more so in the short term.

Fuel prices had been rising internationally until the third week of May but have since corrected by over 10% due to the evolving trade war uncertainty and its implications for global demand in a scenario of more than expected supply response. The pass-through to domestic prices has, however, been incomplete. Hence, there is a latent inflation of around 15 basis points that will enter headline inflation if and when passed through; else, if it is absorbed by the government (through lower profits of public sector undertakings) then it will likely get generalised into headline inflation in due course through a higher fiscal deficit. Thus, even as the correction in fuel prices pulls the inflation trajectory down, the incomplete pass-through over the past few months negates some of the decline.

64. In summary, compared to the April 2019 policy, short-term headline inflation trajectory has risen but the 6-to-12-month trajectory has somewhat softened. For a change, I am not comparing this pattern to that observed in the revision of inflation expectations of households or in the survey of professional forecasters as these were received before the release of the Q4:2018-19 GDP print.

65. There is, however, an important upside risk to RBI’s projected inflation trajectory that I wish to highlight in particular – that of fiscal slippage.

66. Estimates of overall public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) – which appropriately accounts for extra-budgetary resources and other off-balance sheet borrowings of central and state governments –have now reached between 8% and 9% of GDP1.This is at a level similar to that in 2013 at the time of the “taper tantrum” crisis. Following are some salient implications:

While the consolidated fiscal deficit of the center and states might have improved since 2013, the PSBR suggests otherwise.

PSBR has risen since 2014 even during high GDP growth years. The rise in PSBR in fact reflects a structural pattern of greater government expenditures and not just cyclical (such as due to weak tax collections from low growth). In other words, there is a significant aggregate demand push linked to government expenditure that needs to be recognised as a source of inflation; in particular, correct economic measurement of the fiscal slippage should factor in the implications of a rising PSBR rather than rely solely on the consolidated fiscal deficit figures.

Even the cyclical component of PSBR, such as that in the last year due to lower tax collections, raises the inflation trajectory through an increase in issuance of public debt and country risk premium that feed into imported inflation.

Further, PSBR impairs monetary policy transmission due to crowding out effects on market financing through public bonds and on bank deposits through small savings which continue to offer rates that are significantly higher than market yields. This channel bites particularly when the domestic savings rate is on a decline and increases economy’s reliance on external sources of funding.

67. The upcoming Union Budget is, therefore, key to understanding the inflation outlook, especially the response to ongoing distress in the agrarian economy, caused in part by low food prices and reflected in low rural inflation of less than 2% compared to urban inflation that remains above 4%. Would the response worsen the fiscal outlook for next year and beyond, or keep it contained through pursuit of much-needed reforms for the agricultural sector and reduction/rationalisation of other revenue expenditures? Equally importantly, the pattern of PSBR evolution during the rest of 2019-20 would also be critical for assessing the inflation outlook. Hence, the MPC needs to carefully watch out for these fiscal developments.

68. Turning to growth, the Q4:2018-19 GDP print has widened the traditional measure of the output gap to be more negative. Several coincident economic indicators for Q1:2019-20, such as consumer durables and non-durables consumption as well as investment activity continue to remain weak. It is to be noted though that my preferred measure of the output gap – the finance-neutral output gap (FNOG) – remains closed as (i) aggregate credit growth remains above nominal GDP growth rate; (ii) the impact of past two policy rate cuts will provide fuller transmission to the real sector over the next year; and, (iii) the post-election reduction of financial market uncertainty has led to a softening of the bond yields and a rebound in equity markets in May. In other words, growth has slowed down but financial conditions have eased which should provide a tailwind to growth and help investment activity revive on the back of steadily improving capacity utilisation.

69. Nevertheless, on balance, I concluded that the mixed picture on economic growth has morphed into one where at least some aspects have weakened considerably over the past two quarters.

70. In the April 2019 policy, I had voted to keep the policy rate at 6.25%, whereas the MPC had cut the policy rate to 6%. Counterfactual exercises suggest that under the baseline projections of the RBI, the policy repo rate at 6% is just "right" in the short term to achieve MPC's mandated target of 4% headline inflation in the medium term. However, the large decline in ex-food-fuel inflation since the April policy implies some space in these counterfactual exercises to accommodate growth weakness with a policy rate cut of around 20 basis points sometime in the middle of 2019-20.

71. I do remain concerned about the following upside risks to inflation:

The monsoon uncertainty imparting further spike in food prices and the possibility of vegetable price reversal in winter months turning out to be lower than expected. Not only would this worsen the inflation outlook directly, but potentially also indirectly via the fiscal channel as it would aggravate the agrarian distress.

The rise in implied volatility of international crude oil prices from 30% to 50% over the past month even as oil prices have corrected downwards.

The possibility of an upward level-shift in the price of the Indian crude basket due to a shift in its composition from Iran and Venezuela to other oil suppliers.

The fiscal undercurrents impacting the generalized inflation outlook. As also conveyed earlier, I worry especially about a worsening of the PSBR in conjunction with rising oil prices, say due to geopolitical tensions; such a coincidence creates a “twin deficit” – fiscal and current account deficits – scenario for imported inflation, a glimpse of which we have had only recently during H1:2018-19.

72. Let me elaborate on the last of these upside risks. The Indian economy appears to experience “twin deficit” related vulnerability on a regular basis when external shocks amplify domestic weaknesses. The key to dealing with such a scenario is the ability and the willingness of the central bank to maintain credibility of inflation targeting when imported inflation tends to rise steeply (e.g., due to rising oil prices, widening fiscal and current account deficits, and, in turn, depreciating currency). Since monetary policy response will cool down inflation only with substantive lags, some headroom needs to be maintained in the inflation trajectory below the mandated target so as to absorb the steep rise in imported inflation without the headline moving far away from the target. Similarly, headroom needs to be retained in the policy rate space so as to help revive growth with monetary accommodation once the economy has cooled off and twin deficits reined in. In my assessment, this is exactly the "robust" approach that the MPC had adopted during the last year2.

73. Finally, a few words on the trade war uncertainty and India are in order. By not being a significant part of global supply chains in manufacturing, India’s direct exposure to the present correction in global growth is likely to be somewhat muted. Indeed, this consideration has led to India being perceived by investors as somewhat of a “safe haven” economy. Hence, it is my view that growth concerns for India based on moderate trade war concerns are somewhat overstated. A full-scale trade war blowout may, however, result in an emerging markets sell-off by foreign portfolio investors, engulfing India’s external sector and raising prospects of imported inflation, especially if it coincides with a worsening PSBR, and even more perversely, if instead of easing due to weak global growth, oil prices were instead to rise from geopolitical tensions.

74. Counterfactual exercises suggest that a fiscal slippage of 50 basis points (a conservative assessment based on the PSBR estimates) or an oil price increase of 10% leave no space to cut the policy rate below 6%.

75. How should I vote? I found that I was speaking to myself as Santiago, the old fisherman, in “Old Man and the Sea” by Ernest Hemingway:

“It is better to be lucky. But I would rather be exact. Then when luck comes, you are ready.”

76. In spite of my dilemma, I vote – albeit with some hesitation – to frontload the policy rate cut from 6% to 5.75% (a 50 basis points rate cut from my April vote to keep the policy rate at 6.25%). This would provide an insurance to help prevent the output gap from widening further or the finance-neutral output gap (FNOG) from turning negative. The MPC will need to remain on guard and be prepared to provide such insurance in a symmetric manner if upside risks to inflation were to materialize.

77. I also vote to change the monetary policy stance from neutral to accommodative. This is because the uncertainty around the upside risks to inflation I have highlighted will resolve only gradually over the next few months and can be factored into future MPC decisions in a data-dependent manner, but seem highly unlikely to lead to a rate hike at the next policy.