51. In the MPC meeting of April 2019, I had clearly stated that there was a considerable space of about 75 bps to cut policy rate further and voted for a 25 bps reduction with a change of stance from neutral to accommodative. Subsequent developments have further opened up the space by about 20-25 bps. Forecast by RBI 3-4 quarters ahead on headline inflation is down by 10 bps and on annual real GDP growth by 20 bps. Oil prices have remained broadly in my expected range and are softening of late. Inflationary expectations are getting anchored. As I had argued in my statement last time, the core inflation (by whatever definition) shows a declining trend and is no longer sticky at high levels. Recent inflation prints for March and April 2019 show a sharp decline in the core inflation across several goods and services. Real interest rates are very high in the economy adversely impacting costs and thereby our global competitiveness.

In my opinion, we should continue correcting our real interest rates by bringing down our policy rate. I, therefore, vote for changing the stance to accommodative and reducing the policy rate further by 25 bps, although I would have preferred to cut it by 40 bps this time. More precise considerations for my vote are as follows:

Recent developments on global slowdown in growth and international trade, pile up of inventory of oil in USA, and geo-political tensions indicate that oil prices are not likely to breach the band of $ 58 to $ 73 on a durable basis in the near future. Therefore, its adverse impact on headline inflation, if at all, is not likely to be significant.

Growth has seriously dipped and can recover relatively fast on the policy support though it is likely to remain well below the potential at least for next three-four quarters. This will lead to widening of the output gap already created. It would, therefore, put further downward pressure on wages and prices.

Core inflation (with whatever precise definition) is already on a declining trend and is likely to continue to fall over time because of the above reasons. In addition, the inflationary expectations in the economy are also coming down.

Food stocks are more than adequate and available predictions on monsoon are favourable. There is a possibility that food prices may not pick up to the extent predicted. If there are spikes in prices of some vegetables and fruits, they may be temporary and reversible over time. On the whole, there is a good chance that the food inflation and hence the headline inflation may undershoot the expectations.

Central Banks all over the world have become more dovish in their tone and rate hikes are not only on hold but may reverse in some cases. This may generate additional space to correct our real interest rates.

The concern about first, the fiscal slippage at this stage and second, its adverse impact on inflation in my opinion is both misconceived and misplaced. With substantial slowdown in real growth on one hand and inflation rate consistently undershooting both on retail and wholesale basis, the growth of nominal GDP has declined significantly compared to the one assumed for the budget preparation. Under such a cyclical downturn, the fiscal deficit can overshoot the target even without any change in the fiscal policy parameters such as tax rates and expenditure rates. This should not be considered as a fiscal slippage; otherwise the fiscal policy would turn pro-cyclical if the policy makers become obsessed to achieve the observed fiscal deficit target by reducing expenditures or increasing taxes. It would only destabilize the system further rather than stabilizing it as expected of the policy. In order to take care of this anomaly with the observed fiscal deficit target, theory suggests evaluating fiscal performance through the concept of “full-employment budget deficit” or “the structural budget deficit”, which is not observed but has to be calculated taking potential output rather than actual (or observed) output. In practical terms, if the slippage in fiscal deficit is on account of revenue shortfall consequent on the decline in the nominal income growth, it should not be considered a genuine fiscal slippage. If, however, the slippage is because of increased expenditures by the government, it would be a genuine slippage. The current situation needs careful consideration before we conclude on fiscal slippage, because the slippage seems to be more due to revenue shortfall than expenditure increase. Secondly, in the face of a serious slowdown in the economy, a stabilization policy such as fiscal policy should be counter-cyclical and not pro-cyclical. Temporary “observed fiscal slippage” under such circumstances is neither undesirable nor damaging. The fear that it would derail the government from the path of fiscal consolidation and discipline amounts to distrusting the intentions of the government that has a clear and strong political mandate to perform. In my opinion, therefore, under present conditions, concerns about temporary fiscal slippage are misplaced. Moreover, with existence of deficient aggregate demand, minor fiscal slippage in the observed deficit would not be inflationary.

Finally, in most countries that matter to us in terms of trade and finance the real rates of interest are very low; or the real policy rate is barely positive. On the contrary, our real policy rate is in excess of 2 percent and our real interest rates are very high, making our production globally less competitive. We must bring it down to realistic levels of around 1.5 percent sooner than later. With expected inflation around 3.7 percent, there is a space of about 75-80 bps of rate cut.

52. It is prudent to create space for future policy action on either side when the conditions are good. When inflation is under reasonable control and upside risks are muted, this is the right time to correct the high real rates of interest. However, we have to be careful to avoid any knee-jerk reactions and proceed slowly but steadily. It is in this context that it is still not too late in my opinion to change the stance from neutral to accommodative by reducing the policy rate further by 25 bps.