46. Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, rose to 3.2% in June 2019 from 3% in May. Food inflation also increased to 2.4% in June from 2% in the previous month, while CPI inflation excluding food and fuel moderated to 4.1%. Results from surveys provide mixed signals. Inflation expectations of households, as captured through RBI’s Inflation Expectations Survey of Households, remained unchanged from the last round in May for the three-month-ahead horizon but fell by 20 basis points for the one-year-ahead horizon. At the same time, the Industrial Outlook Survey (IOS) showed an expectation of easing of input cost pressures for Q2:2019-20. Upside risks to inflation include continuation of the uptick in food price inflation, uncertainties relating to monsoon, and volatility in international oil prices.

47. Industrial growth, as measured by the index of industrial production, moderated in May to 3.1%, down from 4.3% in the previous month, with manufacturing dropping to 2.5% from 4% and mining slowing to 3.2% from 5.1%. Electricity production, however, grew by 7.4%, up from 6% in April. On the basis of the use-based classification, growth in capital goods, intermediate and primary goods, and infrastructure/construction slowed in the month of May. Consumer durables also decelerated while consumer non-durables accelerated for the third consecutive month. High frequency indicators of rural demand – tractor and motorcycle sales – and of urban demand – passenger vehicle sales – continued to contract. Growth in the index of eight core industries fell to 0.2% in June due to a contraction in crude oil, cement, natural gas and petroleum refinery products.

48. Meanwhile, the manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index increased marginally in July due to an expansion in output, new orders and optimism on demand conditions. The services PMI also grew in July. RBI’s Business Expectations Index of the Industrial Outlook Survey for manufacturing showed modest softening in Q2:2019-20. The Order Books, Inventory and Capacity Utilisation Survey (OBICUS) conducted by RBI suggests a rise in capacity utilisation to 76.1% in Q4:2018-19, but a fall in the seasonally adjusted capacity utilisation to 74.5% in Q4 from 75.6% in Q3. RBI’s Consumer Confidence Indices – Current Situation Index and Future Expectations Index – reflect a drop in the July round compared to the previous May round, implying lower current activity and a less optimistic outlook. On the trade front, there was a broad based fall in exports (-9.7%) and imports (-9.1%) in June 2019, with import of capital goods dropping by 7.7%.

49. Looking forward, Indian exports growth prospects are fading, according to the Indian Leading Exports Index of the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI). This is consistent with the worsening global industrial outlook underscored by ECRI’s Global Leading Manufacturing Index. Further, growth in ECRI’s U.S. Leading Manufacturing Index has dropped back to December’s seven year low. Growth prospects for U.S. consumer spending are also weakening. Further, ECRI’s U.S. Future Inflation Gauge remains in a cyclical downswing, indicating that the inflation cycle downturn that began in mid-2018 is poised to persist.

50. Further, concerns regarding the global slowdown and the trade tensions between U.S. and China still persist. The monetary policy stance of major central banks has recently been more dovish, tending towards easing of rates. On the domestic front, economic activity has softened due to muted consumption and investment activity, and inflation is benign. While considerable liquidity easing has already occurred and cumulative rate cuts of 75 basis points have been undertaken in the last three MPC meetings (between February and June 2019), along with a change in stance in June from neutral to accommodative, there is still policy space for a further cut in the policy rate, given the weak global and domestic economic scenario and a benign inflation outlook.

51. The weighted average call money rate (WACR) has remained broadly aligned with the policy rate, indicating transmission of the reduction in the policy rate. Policy rate reductions of 75 basis points to other money market rates and G-sec yield have also transmitted fully.

52. At the same time, though the transmission of the policy rate cuts to the weighted average lending rate (WALR) on fresh loans of banks has improved from 21 basis points in February and March to 29 basis points during February to June, it was partial, possibly due to transmission lags associated with monetary policy. Nevertheless, the significant monetary policy easing since February 2019, along with surplus liquidity, are likely to enable more transmission to lending rates, and eventually to the real economy. Further, in view of the shadow banking stress, the importance of surplus liquidity has increased. In this regard, measures taken by the government and the RBI to encourage flow of credit to shadow banks are important confidence building steps.

53. It is also important to recognize that, while monetary policy can impact cyclical factors, it has its limitations with respect to significantly impacting structural factors. Therefore, investment-focused fiscal policy and active continuation of structural reforms are imperative at this juncture to complement the already substantial easing that has been delivered since February 2019. In this context, the directional shift in the Budget towards a lower fiscal deficit target may also contribute towards lowering the cost of capital and boosting investment driven growth.

54. Overall, given that the headline inflation is projected to remain below target in 2019-20, I vote for a pre-emptive rate cut of 25 basis points to enhance consumer confidence and improve investor sentiment. On a cumulative basis, this denotes a policy rate cut of 100 basis points since February 2019, which is sufficient at this point in time. I also vote to keep the stance as accommodative.