53. The formation of inflation over recent months is a story of compensating variations in components. But the sum of these parts has moved down over the twelve months ahead horizon on a trajectory that has itself been adjusted downwards four times successively (December 2018; February 2019; April 2019; and June 2019). Risks to the primary target of monetary policy are distinctly on the ebb. Inflation expectations are also better anchored than before. In fact, if one were to step back a little in time, it is evident that if the 2019-20 projections materialise, the MPC would have steered inflation at or below target on average for four years in a row in its five-year term of office.

54. The path of inflation in 2019-20 will likely encounter transient supply shocks such as pre-monsoon food price spikes, which monetary policy should look through and await their reversal. More importantly, this future path will also be conditioned by softening of more durable constituents, which perhaps mirrors the underlying state of the economy. And it is in this context that the conduct of monetary policy over the year ahead will get defined.

55. Lead and coincident indicators gleaned from surveys and other sources emit the following messages:

weakening demand conditions facing manufacturing, which is also denting hiring intentions;

elevated capacity utilisation in the absence of investment in new capacity;

inventories of finished products in several sectors, including houses and automobiles;

still weak pricing power among corporates;

dipping consumer confidence in the economic situation and the employment outlook;

professional forecasters expecting further moderation in private consumption, gross fixed investment, exports and imports.

56. I would submit that all this highlights the deterioration in the outlook for the economy in the year ahead. The recently released estimates of national income for Q4 2018-19 confirm the weakening of economic activity about which I have consistently expressed concerns in my minutes from February 2019. High frequency indicators for Q1 2019-20 point to a broad-basing of the slowdown.

57. Turning to the global economy, it is unlikely that global growth will be able to sustain the uptick in Q1 2019. Intensification of trade wars and geopolitical tensions amidst volatile crude prices and nervous financial markets render the outlook fraught with downside risks. India cannot afford to be complacent about the danger of the global slowdown deepening.

58. In my view, the evolving macroeconomic configuration imparts urgency to strong policy support for the flagging economy in pursuance of the goals set for the MPC. In fact, with inflation projected to remain below target, a higher weight needs to be assigned to growth relative to previous meetings.

59. Most important at this juncture: monetary policy by itself cannot bring about a reinvigoration of economic activity. Monetary policy is taking the lead as the first line of defence, but a coordinated full throttle effort by all arms of macroeconomic management is the need of the hour.

60. On these considerations, I vote for a 25 basis points reduction in the policy rate and a change in the stance of monetary policy to accommodation.