78. Since the last MPC meeting in April 2019, greater clarity has emerged about the evolving macroeconomic situation. Overall, there is clear evidence of economic activity losing traction, with the GDP growth in Q4:2018-19 slowing down to 5.8 per cent. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel registered a 20-month low in April 2019 even as the headline CPI inflation evolved broadly along the projected lines. High frequency indicators suggest that the global economy could not sustain the improved performance in Q1:2019 in the face of a sharp slowdown in trade and manufacturing. Consequently, central banks in both advanced and emerging market economies have adopted an accommodative stance in monetary policy.

79. CPI inflation in April 2019 remained unchanged at the previous month’s level of 2.9 per cent, though there were significant compositional shifts. Inflation in the food group increased sharply to 1.4 per cent in April 2019 from 0.7 per cent in March, with vegetables moving out of deflation after nine months. Inflation in the fuel and light group also rose to 2.6 per cent in April from the February low of 1.2 per cent, mainly due to an increase in the prices of liquified petroleum gas following increase in international prices. However, the increase in food and fuel inflation was entirely offset by a sharp decline in inflation in items excluding food and fuel to 4.5 per cent in April from 5.1 per cent in March – the largest monthly decline since April 2017. The moderation in inflation excluding food and fuel, reflecting weakening of demand conditions, was quite broad-based, spread across several groups like household goods and services, personal care and effects, education and housing. Inflation expectations of households in the May 2019 round of the Reserve Bank’s survey softened further by 20 basis points for the three-month ahead horizon as compared with the previous round, though they remained unchanged for the one-year ahead horizon.

80. Inflation projections have been revised to 3.0-3.1 per cent for H1:2019-20 (up by 10 basis points in comparison with the last policy) and to 3.4-3.7 per cent for H2 (down by 10 basis points relative to the last policy), with risks broadly balanced. There are, however, several uncertainties to the baseline inflation path – the progress of monsoon, unexpected spikes in vegetable prices, international petroleum product prices and their pass-through to domestic prices, volatility in financial markets, and the fiscal situation.

81. Turning to economic activity, the May 31, 2019 data release of the National Statistical Office (NSO) placed GDP growth for 2018-19 at 6.8 per cent, down by 20 basis points relative to its February 28, 2019 estimates. In Q4 of 2018-19, GDP growth decelerated sharply to 5.8 per cent from 6.6 per cent in Q3 and 8.1 per cent a year ago. Though the base effect played some part, growth momentum also slowed down. Investment activity, in particular, decelerated sharply. On the supply side, agriculture and allied activities contracted, while manufacturing activity weakened significantly. Service sector growth remained resilient, though construction activity decelerated markedly.

82. Looking ahead, the forecast of a normal south-west monsoon by India Meteorological Department (IMD) augurs well for agriculture. Even as the third advance estimates of foodgrains production for 2018-19 were lower (by 0.6 per cent) as compared with the previous year, adequate stocks of foodgrains (3.4 times the prescribed buffer norms) provide a backstop against any supply shocks. In the industrial sector, growth in eight core industries decelerated sharply in April. Credit flows from banks to large industries strengthened, though they remained muted for micro and small as well as medium industries. Seasonally adjusted capacity utilisation (CU) in the manufacturing sector slipped to 75.2 per cent in Q4 from 75.8 per cent in Q3. Growth in imports of capital goods – a key indicator of investment activity – remained weak in April. High frequency indicators suggest moderation in activity in the service sector. Sales of commercial vehicles, tractors, passenger cars, and two- and three-wheelers contracted in April. Cement production and steel consumption – the two key indicators of construction activity – slowed down in April. Overall imports in April grew at a much faster pace than exports. Projected GDP growth for 2019-20 is revised downwards from 7.2 per cent in the April policy to 7.0 per cent – in the range of 6.4-6.7 per cent for H1:2019-20 and 7.2-7.5 per cent for H2 – with risks evenly balanced.

83. Over the last few years, the Central Government has by and large followed a policy of fiscal prudence. It has adhered to the fiscal deficit glide path in the last 5 years, though at a somewhat slower pace than committed earlier. Public sector borrowing includes several public sector enterprises which have their own revenue streams to service their debt and take care of their liabilities. Borrowings by such public sector enterprises are mostly for capital expenditure. Hence, such borrowings should be viewed differently.

84. Liquidity in the system turned into surplus in early June after a large injection of durable liquidity by the Reserve Bank in the previous months. The 10-year government securities benchmark yield has declined by about 40 basis points from its average in April 2019 to about 7 per cent. The transmission of the cumulative reduction of 50 bps in the policy repo rate in February and April 2019 to fresh rupee loans has been 21 basis points. However, the weighted average lending rate on outstanding loans has increased by 4 basis points. Going forward, the transmission is expected to improve, given the lags with which banks adjust their deposit and lending rates in response to changes in the policy rate. It is to be noted that quite a sizable part of loan portfolio of banks continues at the base rate, which impedes monetary transmission. Interest rates on small savings are also higher than the prescribed formula.

85. In sum, growth impulses have clearly weakened, while the headline inflation trajectory is projected to remain below 4.0 per cent throughout 2019-20 even after considering the expected transmission of the past two policy rate cuts. Keeping in view the evolving growth-inflation dynamics, there is a need for decisive monetary policy action. Hence, my vote is to reduce the policy repo rate by 25 basis points. My vote is also to shift the stance of monetary policy from neutral to accommodative to send a clear signal.