55. After the last meeting of MPC in June 2019, several important events have occurred. Inflation readings for May and June 2019 were almost as per the RBI projections. While the Economic Survey 2018-19 provided a growth assessment very similar to the one by RBI, the Union Budget 2019-20 assumed a substantially higher growth rate for the current fiscal year. Monsoon is likely to be normal. Tariff war tensions have further escalated. Oil prices have continued fluctuating within the range I had mentioned in my earlier statements. Growth impulses are, however, weak on the whole and not significantly picking up for substantial revival. It is well recognized in the literature and reiterated by the Economic Survey 2018-19 that investment is a primary driver for economic growth and employment creation. In order to boost investment activities, positive sentiments and business-conducive environment need to be enhanced. It requires carrying out several economic reform measures in the land and labour markets, tariffs of electricity and other resources, and taxation of income and goods and services, besides urgently correcting prevailing high real interest rates in India. While most of these measures are not within the purview of the monetary policy, correction of high real interest rates to a certain extent is. Since I do not see any major threat to inflation in the foreseeable future, I would like to vote for a 35 bps cut in the policy repo rate to correct high real interest rates in order to enhance investment sentiments and revive growth impulses. More specific reasons for my vote are as follows:

RBI surveys have found that the corporates are now investing more in the financial assets than in the physical assets. Thus, they are turning savers rather than investors. This provides indirect evidence of the adverse impact of high real interest rates prevailing in the economy. Economic reform measures would be more effective if the necessary incentives in terms of costs are there.

Fiscal slippage is not a matter of serious concern for the rest of the year, because the Union Budget has maintained the target given in the fiscal consolidation path and the state budgets put together are also not likely to show any serious divergence from the path.

The fiscal policy as indicated by the Union Budget 2019-20 on the contrary is on a tighter side rather than expansionary side. The budgeted fiscal deficit this year and projected for the next two years in the medium term strategy paper are very much on the fiscal consolidation path notwithstanding current slowdown and emergence of substantial negative output gap. As I had argued in my statement in the previous MPC meeting, adhering to the fiscal deficit target during a downturn of the business cycle amounts to a tight fiscal policy. It is also corroborated by the increased taxation and maintaining expenditure relative to GDP in the budget. The monetary policy has to, therefore, do its bit to provide the boost to the economy however short-lived it may be, because currently inflation does not appear to be a concern in the next 3-4 quarters at least.

Globally, central banks have not only been dovish in their stance but have also cut their policy rates.

Inflationary expectations one year ahead by households have been declining and the latest round shows about a 20 bps fall over the previous round. If one outlier city is excluded, the fall is much larger. Similarly the business expectations about headline CPI inflation one year ahead by the IIMA survey shows the expectation of about 3.7 percent, which is very close to the RBI prediction as well.

Thus, there is enough policy space to cut the policy repo rate to correct the high real interest rate in the economy. The transmission of the policy rate cuts in the current cycle is likely to take some time because of the lags involved on account of the nature of the banking business. However, under prevailing circumstances, the immediate transmission should be considered not so much in terms of the bank deposit and lending rates but more specific rates influencing new investments such as housing loans, vehicle loans and long term bonds.

56. Given that there is a significant policy space to correct the real rate of interest and thereby helping the economic activities to recover, it is prudent in my opinion to cut the policy rate somewhat aggressively but cautiously keeping some space for future exigencies. As far as the general practice of taking 25 bps as a unit for cutting or raising the policy rate is concerned, there is no logic or scientific basis for it, particularly when we measure inflation rate, GDP growth rate, fiscal deficit percentage, etc. in single decimal. Ideally, there is a case for considering the unit to be 10 bps for cutting or raising the policy rate. I would, therefore, like to cut the policy rate by 40 bps, but I do not mind going with majority opinion of cutting the rate by 35 bps this time, and maintaining the accommodative stance.