73. Economic activity has weakened further since the last MPC meeting in August 2019 with growth for Q1:2019-20 turning out to be 5 per cent. Various high frequency indicators show that economic activity remained weak in Q2. Inflation has evolved broadly along the projected lines and remains benign; while food inflation has edged up further in the last two months reflecting the sharper than expected increase in food prices, CPI inflation excluding food and fuel has moderated consistent with the slowing down of the economy. The global economy continued to lose traction with high frequency indicators in both the advanced and emerging market economies weakening further in Q3:2019, dragged down by escalating trade tensions and rising geo-political uncertainties. Central banks across the advanced and emerging market economies have adopted more accommodative stances of monetary policy to bolster their economies.

74. Headline CPI inflation edged up marginally in August, driven by an upward movement in food inflation reflecting the sharp summer uptick in prices of vegetables and a pick-up in pulses inflation. The increase in prices of vegetables this year was higher than that in last two years, but it was still in line with the long-term average. Fuel inflation moved further into deflation caused by a decline in prices of liquified petroleum gas (LPG). Inflation excluding food and fuel moderated in August, reversing the increase in the previous month; the moderation was broad-based, which more than offset the sharp increase in gold prices. CPI inflation excluding food and fuel moderated by around 90 bps between March and August 2019. Inflation expectations of households in the September round of the Reserve Bank’s survey increased by 40 basis points for a 3-month ahead horizon and 20 basis points for a 12-month ahead horizon. Overall, the near-term inflation scenario remains subdued; CPI inflation projections have been revised slightly upwards to 3.4 per cent for Q2:2019-20 but have been retained at 3.5-3.7 per cent for H2:2019-20 and 3.6 per cent for Q1:2020-21, with risks evenly balanced.

75. Moving on to economic activity, real GDP growth moderated to 5 per cent in the first quarter of 2019-20 as against the projection of 5.8 per cent made in the August policy. Private consumption declined even as investment demand remained weak. The slowdown in industrial activity that began in Q2:2018-19 accentuated further in Q1:2019-20 with manufacturing growth moderating to 0.6 per cent. High frequency indicators suggest that economic activity remained weak in Q2:2019-20. Industrial production growth decelerated in July 2019 in comparison with the same month of last year, while the output of eight core industries contracted in August. The slowing domestic demand was also reflected in shrinkage in non-oil non-gold imports in July-August. The manufacturing PMI for September 2019 was flat. High frequency indicators suggest that services sector activity also remained weak in July-August. Key indicators of both rural demand, viz., tractors and motor cycles sales, and urban demand such as passenger vehicles sales contracted in July-August.

76. On the positive side, the first advance estimates of major kharif crops for 2019-20 are broadly in line with the last year’s fourth advance estimates. More importantly, the prospects for the rabi 2019-20 season have brightened with the improved position of the live storage of water in major reservoirs. This portends well for the farm sector, and the revival of rural demand. Seasonally adjusted capacity utilisation in the manufacturing improved marginally from 74.5 per cent in Q4:2018-19 to 74.8 per cent in Q1:2019-20 in the last round of the Reserve Bank’s survey. This was close to the long-term average, reflecting intensive use of existing capacities. Real GDP growth for 2019-20 has now been revised downwards from 6.9 per cent in the August policy to 6.1 per cent – 5.3 per cent in Q2:2019-20 and in the range of 6.6-7.2 per cent for H2:2019-20 – with risks evenly balanced; GDP growth for Q1:2020-21 has also been revised downwards to 7.2 per cent.

77. Overall liquidity in the system remained in surplus in August and September. However, monetary transmission has remained weak. As against the cumulative policy repo rate reduction of 110 bps during February-August 2019, the weighted average lending rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans of commercial banks declined by 29 bps. The WALR on outstanding rupee loans, in contrast, increased by 7 basis points. However, with the external benchmark framework coming into force from October 1, the transmission is expected to improve in the coming weeks and months.

78. Overall, domestic demand has moderated significantly. The weakening of private consumption, which for long has been the bedrock of aggregate demand, in particular, is a matter of concern. Private investment has also lost traction, with the corporate sector reluctant to make fresh investments even though capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector has operated close to the long-term average in the recent period. The unsettled global environment in the face of rising trade tensions has impacted India’s exports, besides delaying the revival of private investment by creating uncertainty. In this environment, it is important to focus on strengthening domestic demand. The MPC has cumulatively reduced the policy repo rate by 110 basis points since the February 2019 policy and changed the stance from neutral to accommodative in the June policy. Systemic liquidity has been in surplus since June 2019. As stated earlier, the introduction of lending rates linked to an external benchmark should result in better monetary transmission.

79. The government has also initiated several measures in recent months which, together with monetary easing by the Reserve Bank, are gradually expected to work their way through the real economy. At the same time, continuing slowdown of the economy requires all out efforts to strengthen private consumption and investment. There is also a need to be watchful of the fiscal situation; however, the government has indicated that it would maintain the fiscal deficit. As the inflation scenario remains benign with headline inflation projected at below target in the remaining period of 2019-20 and Q1:2020-21, there is policy space to address growth concerns. Hence, I vote for reducing the policy repo rate by 25 basis points. With this, the policy repo rate would cumulatively stand reduced by 135 basis points in eight months. I also vote for persevering with the accommodative stance as long as it is necessary to revive growth, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target. This enhanced forward guidance on the stance of monetary policy should strengthen monetary transmission and support the real economy.