57. Since the MPC met in June, the macroeconomic outlook appears to have darkened, denting business and consumer confidence. This deterioration is getting reflected in inflation outcomes:

a pre-monsoon food price build-up was anticipated and it is tracking the seven-year average i.e., the history of the index, in spite of unfavourable base effects – this suggests that food prices are actually stabilising;

pressure points have opened up – pulses; dairy products; proteins; oils and fats – but there have been no unruly spikes; moreover, they fall in the remit of supply management policies, since they either reflect sectoral imbalances or cost push factors and nimble steps assume priority in order to prevent price pressures from accumulating;

the dynamics of inflation excluding food and fuel warrant concern, especially its broad-based and persisting softness because it seems to be mirroring the weakening of domestic demand.

58. In terms of the technology of monetary policy, the intrinsic link between underlying inflation and the output gap is stark – the Phillips curve is alive and well in India, notwithstanding some recent loss of faith. This validates the policy actions and a shift in the stance since February 2019.

59. Turning to the state of the economy, virtually every indicator of activity is turning down. Global growth flattered in Q1 of 2019 only to deceive in Q2. Global trade is in contraction. In India, high frequency indicators have focused the narrative on the slowdown in investment, the silence of the animal spirits embodied in the flattening of capital goods production, the absolute decline in capital goods imports and the deceleration in construction activity. What is worrisome though is that other components of aggregate demand could be joining investment in the loss of speed. Private consumption, the bedrock of domestic demand (57 per cent of GDP), is losing momentum in both urban and rural areas. Meanwhile, the deceleration in external demand on account of trade and geopolitical tensions has muted exports and sunk imports into contraction. The fiscal stimulus from the 7th Pay Commission award and one rank one pension (OROP) is fading (0.9 per cent of GDP in 2017-18 and 0.3 per cent in 2018-19); this was expected as the stimulus was in the form of revenue expenditure and the revenue multiplier in India is less than unity.

60. The key issue is: what is the extent of the downturn? This is hard to decipher at this stage – indicators of global economic activity are flashing amber or red, but there is no recession. Yet, projections of growth are being repeatedly marked down. The number of central banks that have either eased monetary policy or are getting ready to do so has increased, and ‘insurance’ cuts are becoming visible.

61. In India, negative gaps have opened up in respect of both output and inflation, warranting an appropriate policy response. The issue is: how is the policy headroom to be used? Monetary policy has been proactive and front-loaded as the first line of defence. From here on, the space for monetary policy action has to be calibrated to the evolving situation, especially as the nature and depth of the slowdown is still unravelling and elbow room may be needed if it deepens. A more broad-sided response involving all levers of policy acquires the highest priority now. The overarching goal is to reinvigorate domestic demand and the time to do it is now.

62. On these considerations, I vote for a 35 basis points reduction in the policy rate while persevering with the accommodative stance of monetary policy.