32. In the last several reviews, I have highlighted the need for keeping inflationary expectations anchored durably at the 4% target. While the 3 month and 1 year ahead inflationary expectation numbers still remain elevated, the decline in median inflationary expectations in the most recent round for three months (by 80 basis points) and for 1 year ahead (by 130 basis points) is encouraging. This is the first time since the history of the survey that the change in inflationary expectations has been as large as it has from a “low” level.

33. Going forward, lower oil and food prices – if sustained – will help inflationary expectations further taper allowing for the durability of the 4% target.

34. Oil prices have declined by more than 30 percent since its peak in early October mainly reflecting increases and prospective increases in global supply. Food inflation was in deflation (-1.5%, Y-o-Y) in December. Few commodities (pulses, sugar) continue to have persisting deflation, although pulses deflation has reduced from double digits to a single digit. The existing glut in international markets for various food commodities will limit the scope for food exports keeping a lid on food commodities inflation in the months ahead. Inadequate procurement has also helped limit the pass through from higher MSP prices to headline inflation.

35. RBI’s projections for Q3 FY 19-20 headline inflation stand at 3.9%. These projections are however sensitive to the assumed momentum on food inflation. If, for instance, vegetable prices rebound in April-August in a stronger way, these projections will be easily breached. The bouncing back of vegetable prices is not an unreasonable assumption when seen from the perspective of the high weighted contribution of vegetables to food inflation in the last 6 years or so. Also, area under Rabi crops sown so far is lower. Factors like these make it opportune to wait and watch to see how the food price sub-index evolves in the next couple of months.

36. The elevated level of inflation ex food and fuel continues to be challenging, despite the fall from 5.8% in November to 5.6% in December. Offsetting base and momentum effects have kept inflation ex food and fuel sticky. The m-o-m seasonally adjusted annualised rate (saar) for inflation ex food fuel in December 2018 was elevated at 5.4 per cent.

37. Inflation has thus softened but not in a broad-based way.

38. I see the growth picture as robust despite the emergence of soft spots. Economic growth in the last four years (since the advent of inflation targeting) based on CSO’s latest revisions averaged 7.7%, which is consistent with elevated core inflation and a virtually closed output gap. While non-food bank credit (NFBC) growth has declined marginally in the last few months, it continues to be high (14.6% on January 18, 2019). Credit growth to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) was also high at 55.1% in December 2018 according to RBI data. This level has been above 40% since July 2018. Both the service and manufacturing PMIs continue to be in expansion mode for the last several months. Seasonally adjusted capacity utilization rose for the 2nd consecutive quarter in Q2: 18-19 to 75.3%. There was also a significant improvement in consumer sentiment.

39. On the downside, the IIP fell to a 17 month low at 0.5% Y-o-Y, although this reflects the somewhat higher volatility typical of the October-December window because of festive holidays. Consumer durable goods production also contracted by 0.9 per cent in November 2018. Growth in a number of economies has slowed this year due to trade tensions and the associated uncertainty. This clouds India’s export outlook and should be carefully watched.

40. I also worry that India is not consolidating fiscally although the extra budgetary spending on social welfare and stimulative programs may not materialize (unless states match it with their own initiatives). The quality of fiscal expenditures after the election may also improve.

41. Given the above reasons, maintaining status quo on the rates would be consistent with sustainable growth in the economy and achieving the inflation target over the medium-term.

42. I vote, however, to change the stance to neutral from ‘calibrated tightening’.

