30. Since the last review, there has been a 40 bps increase in the three month ahead inflation expectations of households (now at 8%), and a 20 bps increase in the level of one year ahead inflationary expectations (to 8.1%). Households’ current perception of inflation also increased by 50 bps to 7.1%. The proportion of respondents (both in the three month and one year buckets) expecting inflation to be less than 6% has fallen. The uptick in inflationary expectations, while adaptively reflecting the uptick in food inflation, comes on the back of several rounds of declines, and therefore acquires salience.

31. The uptick in food inflation (3% in August) needs to be carefully watched. Vegetable prices have increased by 23.9% during April-August 2019 (compared to 15.7% in the same period last year), reflecting a stronger-than-usual summer uptick. The cumulative momentum in food prices during April-August was also higher (5.5%) compared to the same period last year (3.2%). Pulses inflation has turned positive for the first time since May 2019. The cumulative momentum on items like meat and fish has been higher than earlier occasions. The late exit of the monsoon will however be favorable for Rabi crop growing and should have a mitigating effect on the ongoing uptick in food inflation in the next couple of months.

32. Notwithstanding the uptick in food inflation, headline CPI inflation was almost flat at 3.2%. The August reading for inflation ex food and fuel was lower at 4.2% compared to 4.5% in July. The forward trajectory of inflation ex food and fuel will be influenced by several factors: the pace of growth, favorable base effects, lagged effects of the depreciation in the INR, the price of crude, and the pass-through of inflationary expectations into inflation ex food and fuel. These variables need to be carefully watched.

33. Since the last review, economic activity has continued to weaken.

34. This was manifest most poignantly in the weak Q1 FY19:20 growth numbers (5%) which slowed for a 5th consecutive quarter. Real GVA growth at 4.9% for Q1 FY 19:20 also continued to decline. Consumption demand grew at 3.1%, which is the slowest reading in 4 years. Investment grew at 4%, marginally higher than that in Q4 FY 18:19 which was 3.6%. Since the last review, the output gap has widened further.

35. External demand conditions have worsened. Geopolitical risks remain unresolved. There has been a resurgence of trade policy tensions, and global growth has continued to weaken. Exports contracted in Q1 FY19:20.

36. Domestically, sentiment remains weak. Consumer confidence fell for the 3rd consecutive round. Both the Current Situation Index (CSI) and Future Expectations Index (FEI) produced by the RBI have recorded lower readings compared to the previous round. Based on RBI’s survey of manufacturing activity, real sales growth across 1723 listed private manufacturing companies has become negative for the first time since Q1 FY 16:17. Capacity utilization has also fallen to 73.6% after growing consistently since Q1 FY 18:19. RBI’s Business Assessment Index (BAI) moved into a contraction zone. The Business Expectation Index (BEI) also dipped. However, sales growth remained steady for the non-IT services sector. I worry that weak sentiments may become self-fulfilling, which will complicate the job of monetary policy.

37. On the positive side, July IIP growth was higher at 4.3% compared to the June reading, largely driven by consumer non-durables and intermediate goods. The consumer non-durables segment, which typically proxies for fast moving consumer goods (FMCG), was strong at 8.3% (although influenced by a disproportionate jump in one-off items). However, capital goods contracted (-7.1%). Consumer durables also contracted (-2.7%). What mitigates this is the truncated IIP (i.e., taking out 2 per cent of most volatile components from both sides) which gives rise to a growth in the IIP of 2.4 per cent in July 2019. While there is a divergence in the year on year consumer durable growth number compared to its seasonally adjusted month on month momentum (7.5 % in July), this divergence has to be seen in the backdrop of high year on year growth of 14.1 per cent in July 2018.

38. FDI has picked up in April – July 2019 relative to 2018.

39. Compared to the last review, monetary transmission has become worse. The decline in the WALR on fresh rupee remained at 29 bps as in the last review. The WALR on outstanding rupee loans has however increased by 7 bps! This is despite the MPC cutting rates by 110 bps in the February-August window. The RBI should be commended for implementing a new set of norms on external benchmarking. This will help with monetary transmission. But as Milton Friedman said, monetary policy works with long and variable lags. In the Indian case, these lags are made worse by frictions in the banking system, complicating the MPC’s efforts to implement counter-cyclical policy.

40. I strongly feel that we need a more informed discussion of fiscal policy in India. While the government should be commended for implementing a new corporate tax rate regime, based on the discussion that I read, I find it premature, without a proper “dynamic scoring” analysis, to speculate on the impact of the tax cut on the fiscal deficit, what part of the economic effects will be on the demand side, and what part will be on the supply side.

41. In some of my own research with co-authors, we show that an impact of a corporate tax cut on GDP in an emerging market economy like India may not be very large. It leads to a rebalancing of the economy away from consumption and towards investment (which is why the GDP effects are muted). Overall, the tax cut leads to a decline in the fiscal deficit in the long run, although the size of this effect is negligible. The lowering impact on the fiscal deficit however depends on a very strong investment effect from the tax cut, which may not happen in the current economic climate.

42. Given the above, what is the appropriate path of monetary policy?

43. There is always a tension between pro-active risk management and being data dependent. Growth impulses however continue to be weak. Given this, the MPC has been pro-active in adjusting policy as reflected in the quantum of past rate cuts. Monetary policy however cannot be a permanent form of stimulus. As Lawrence Lindsey says in his book, The Growth Experiment Revisited (Basic Books, 2013) “Monetary policy should lean against the wind and help stabilize the business cycle. But it cannot become the wind itself, particularly one that blows at gale force.”

44. I vote to reduce the policy rate by 25 bps. I also vote to retain the stance as accommodative. I will remain data dependant, going forward; further monetary policy action will depend on the evolving growth-inflation dynamics.