51. My sense from recent readings is that inflation is troughing and its path over the 12-months ahead horizon is likely to be one that rises from current lows.

52. Given that inflation excluding food and fuel is elevated but sticky (fuel inflation is easing and its weight in the CPI is small relatively speaking), the future trajectory of headline inflation will be determined essentially by the momentum of food price changes, especially in the first half of 2019-20 when typically, there is a pre-monsoon firming up.

53. The critical judgment call is: will the momentum of food prices revert to the typical pattern from the unusually subdued pace observed in 2018-19 (April-August), or, will it take some time for large excess supplies in several food items to balance out before the usual momentum takes hold? My sense is the latter, given that the prices of some items like pulses and sugar are sluggishly emerging out of a deep cyclical downswing, while those of oils and fats are muted by the turning down of international commodity prices, and other prices such as those of fruits, vegetables and milk are experiencing irregular and unusual softness. The outlook for cereal prices has also turned benign, with prospects of drawing down of sizable excess buffer stocks in the months ahead.

54. Meanwhile, outside the food group, upside risks to the headline inflation path from crude prices have also ebbed considerably and the recent upsurges in prices of education and health could possibly be short-lived.

55. In an inflation targeting framework, the forecast becomes the intermediate target because it congeals all available information on the final goal variables – inflation and growth – which are invisible. The forecast indicates that headline inflation is likely to course below 4 per cent up to the third quarter of 2019-20, thus securing the target over a one-year ahead time horizon. Significantly, the path of inflation has been adjusted downwards by 40-80 basis points since the last meeting of the MPC in December 2018. This is consistent with the stylised evidence – surveyed households, businesses and professional forecasters have made sizable corrections in their inflation expectations over the next twelve months; consumers are more sanguine about the evolving price situation than before; and cost pressures are moderate with delayed and incomplete pass-through to selling prices. The key insight is provided by the direction of these adjustments, not their levels.

56. As the amended RBI Act enjoins us, if the primary target for headline inflation is achieved on a reasonably lasting basis, it opens up some headroom to address the objective of growth. The MPC will need to closely monitor the evolution of these disparately driven price movements and calibrate the monetary policy stance accordingly. If the momentum of food price changes in the next few months indicates that inflation is likely to rise above 4 per cent and persist in the upper reaches of the tolerance band, pre-emptive action will be warranted to ensure that the primary objective of maintaining price stability is defended and achieved lastingly.

57. Turning to the outlook for growth, domestic activity remains resilient, but it appears to be shedding some speed in the second half of 2018-19. Dark clouds seem to be gathering over the horizon. High frequency indicators suggest that the pick-up in investment in the first half of 2018-19 may have lost some strength in the second half and considerable uncertainty shrouds the prospects of an improvement in private investment – especially into new capacity addition – and capacity utilisation in manufacturing is straining above trend in view of the still weak capex cycle.

58. The biggest downside risk to growth is likely to stem from global developments – the weakening of global growth in the second half of 2018 may prolong into coming quarters; global trade and investment may be impacted by ongoing trade tensions; and tail risks from policy uncertainties in systemically important economies may crystallise. Should a deeper than currently anticipated global slowdown take hold, domestic activity could be dragged down by retarding impulses transmitted through the channels of exports and investment. In this scenario, it is prudent to preserve sufficient policy space to insulate the economy from adverse external shocks and boost the domestic economy in an opportune manner rather than deplete it in haste.

59. Accordingly, I vote for a 25 basis points reduction in the policy rate and a pre-emptive shift to a neutral policy stance.