31. Since the last review, there has been a further decline in the 3 month ahead inflationary expectations by 20 bps but with no change in the 1 year ahead inflationary expectations. Both the three month ahead inflationary expectations and the current perception of inflation have now declined in 4 consecutive rounds reflecting more benign inflation conditions. While inflationary expectations from RBI’s household survey may have bottomed out, I find it encouraging that the 58th round of the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) indicates better anchoring of inflationary expectations to the medium target of 4 percent.

32. While headline inflation evolves in line with projections (April print was 2.92%, March print was 2.86%), food inflation has ticked up and doubled since the March print. I have been concerned that one year ahead headline inflation projections have been assuming lower food momentum, small deviations from which could easily make headline inflation projections breach the 4% target. More realistic baseline parameter assumptions used in current projections however rectify this, and suggest that 1 year ahead headline projections will undershoot the 4% medium target (average Q4 FY 20 values are 3.8%).

33. Inflation ex food fuel has precipitously dropped by 60 bps to 4.5% in April from 5.1% in March, which is the lowest print since September 2017. Even factoring in the latent pass through of the spike in crude that happened before the general election results were declared on May 23, the month-on-month SAAR rate for inflation ex food and fuel is still subdued in April 2019 (around 1.87%).

34. I see two risks here: first, the INR has depreciated more than other EME currencies in the last one year; second, crude prices tend to make the INR more vulnerable. I continue to remain watchful of the risk that the INR and crude will have on the trajectory of inflation ex food and fuel. Food inflation, however, will continue to normalize in the April-August period. It remains to be seen how strong the spillovers are from a cyclical seasonal movement, especially in vegetables, on inflation ex food and fuel. This should be carefully monitored.

35. On the growth front, compared to the last review, several indicators are flagging red. The crucial question is how deep is the cyclical downturn.

36. While RBI’s study on corporate performance for Q4 FY 19 indicates that demand conditions continued to moderate (proxied by nominal and sales growth of 1432 firms), this moderation was not broad-based. For instance, sales growth improved in sectors like food products and beverages, and remained steady and in double digits in cement and cement products and chemical and chemical products. Likewise, high double digit growth in sales was recorded in wholesale and retail trade and transport and storage services. Since new launches of private real estate continue to languish, it would appear that the stable growth in cement and steel could be driven by a government push in infrastructure building and affordable housing. A carefully done base-momentum decomposition analysis of seasonally adjusted Industrial GVA indicates that, during 2018-2019, barring the significant push to Industry GVA provided by the base effect in Q1, it is an unfavorable base effect which acted as a drag on industrial growth in the other quarters. Likewise, a decomposition of gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) into base and momentum effects indicates that investments during Q4: 2018-2019 were down primarily due to an adverse base effect, with some deceleration in momentum. Nominal GVA growth of listed private manufacturing companies however was dented by lower staff costs, which moved into single digit growth (6.4%) after many quarters, possibly reflecting lower employment creation.

37. There is a larger issue in my mind as to why RBI’s study on corporate performance paints a less drastic (or mixed) picture on the health of the economy when compared to say other indicators used in the national account statistics (NAS), or the IIP. It may possibly be because it samples a smaller universe of non-governmental non-financial (i.e., private sector) firms, although more analysis needs to be done. For instance, most consumption indicators in the IIP are now flashing red and have worsened since the last review. Consumer durable growth, reflecting stress in the auto sector, moved into contraction (-5.3%). Capital goods, reflecting the decline in machine and equipment, was also in contraction (-8.7%). Consumer non-durables growth, reflecting declines in discretionary income, was low (+0.3%).

38. These declines are reflected in a further widening in the output gap since the last review. The widening of the output gap is also in sync with a low print of Q4 FY 19 growth of 5.8%, and the virtual stalling of gross fixed capital formation growth in Q4 FY 19.

39. On the external front, the pace of activity has continued to slow down. The world output gap is more negative compared to a couple of months ago. I continue to view the consolidated fiscal deficit (as embodied in the public sector borrowing requirement) as jeopardizing the durability of the inflation target in the medium term. There are a few issues here.

40. One, our practice of fiscal policy where large swings in government final consumption expenditure in the final quarter of a fiscal year are required to meet fiscal deficit targets imparts substantial volatility to growth rates. This makes it difficult to design monetary policy. Second, fiscal ‘prestidigitation’ or sleight of hand may contribute to our own version of a “doom-loop”, i.e., by pushing expenditure off budget to meet deficit targets and then recourse to borrowing from the national small savings fund by state entities keeps administrative interest rates high to incentivise such savings. This impedes monetary transmission. Poor monetary transmission requires more active fiscal policy to compensate which breaches fiscal targets once again.

41. I also worry that the very nature of the Indian growth model, which requires excessive policy induced tinkering with the inter-sectoral terms of trade to meet both distributional objectives and demand push objectives makes fiscal-monetary coordination difficult.

42. The job of good monetary policy is to close gaps. A widening negative output gap and below target inflation warrants a monetary policy response. A rate cut at the current juncture would help both close the output gap and bring inflation back to target, a situation of “divine-coincidence”.

43. Going forward, I will remain data dependent, and will carefully watch the incoming growth and inflation data.

44. I vote to cut the policy rate by 25 basis points, and shift the stance to accommodative.