58. Macroeconomic data coming in after the last meeting of MPC in August 2019 have further confirmed our serious concerns about the growth slow-down with continued benign inflation outlook. Compared to the expectation of 5.8% of real GDP growth during the first quarter of the current year 2019-20, the official estimate of the growth turned out to be far less at 5.0%. While we cannot rule out the possibility of the figure getting revised marginally upward by 10-20 bps, significant undershooting of the growth during Q1-2019-20 has to be recognized. In spite of late efforts by RBI and the Central Government to provide respectively the monetary and fiscal boost, it appears that growth recovery may take longer than expected. In fact, RBI has now revised its growth prediction for the current year 2019-20 substantially downward by 80 bps compared to the August meeting of MPC. Prediction about inflation rate, on the other hand, has been fairly stable and well below the target of 4%. As per the mandate given to the MPC by the Act under such circumstances, the growth concerns have to be addressed. In my opinion, we need to maintain accommodative stance with possible rate action till growth recovers provided the inflation remains within the target. At this juncture, I would like to act more aggressively by reducing the policy Repo Rate further by 40 bps so as to correct the real interest rates in the economy in due course. It would still leave some space for the rate action if required in future. More specific reasons for my vote are as follows –

High frequency data on indicators for estimating quarterly growth suggest that the growth slow-down may continue in the second quarter of 2019-20. Any substantial recovery is likely only in the Q3 of 2019-20. This is because, the impact of corporate tax cut particularly for the new enterprises and good monsoon will be kicking off from the third quarter of the current year. As a result, the output gap would continue to be negative for at least next 3 to 4 quarters leading to downward pressures on the CPI excluding food and fuel.

Food inflation is likely to remain muted in the face of good monsoon with better Rabi season. While some vegetables and fruits may experience spikes during the year, they are not likely to result in permanent high prices.

Fuel prices also do not show an average expectation to rise substantially. In fact, all indications suggest fluctuating oil prices around $58-65 range on a sustained basis.

Thus, inflation rate crossing the mid-point target of 4% during the next year or so has very little probability. This is also supported by the inflationary expectation of businesses on the headline CPI inflation one year ahead of 3.70% as per the latest IIMA survey. Although RBI’s own survey of household inflationary expectation shows a rise of 20 bps one year ahead, it is likely to have been influenced by the food price hike before the survey. RBI’s own prediction of the headline inflation by Q1-2020-21 has remained the same at 3.6%. This generates substantial space for a rate cut to further correct the high real interest rate and encourage investment.

The Economic Survey 2018-19 has argued with empirical support that, while the household savings in India are determined by the growth of income and demography and not so much by the high real interest rate, the private investment is significantly and negatively related to the real interest rate. In my opinion, this is an important finding for the current situation. Whereas most comparator countries have their real policy rates around zero percent, our real policy rate is around 1.8 to 2 percent. Correcting high real interest rates can go a long way to revive the economy from the slow growth.

In my opinion, concerns about likely slippage of the combined deficit during this year are misplaced as I have argued earlier. In any case, the overall impact of all current announcements on the combined fiscal deficit as per my calculation is likely to be hardly 10 to 20 bps assuming the GST revenues are as per the budgeted target. It should not have any serious adverse impact on the inflation.

59. External bench-marking of the lending rates by the banks would result in better transmission now. Corporate bond market reforms by allowing entry to corporates with lower rating than AAA; encouraging issuance of long term bonds and creating a proper yield curve for the government bond market to serve as a bench-mark can go a long way to deepen the market and improve the transmission. While such reforms are urgently required, they should not constrain the rate action by RBI. In my opinion, enough space exists as argued above for a 40 bps reduction in the policy repo rate now with space still existing for future till growth recovers. Hence, I vote for continuing with accommodative stance and cut the policy repo rate by 40 bps now.