43. Headline inflation softened to 2.2 per cent in December from 2.3 per cent in November and 3.4 per cent in October, primarily due to a drop in food inflation from -0.1 per cent in October to -1.7 per cent in November and -1.5 per cent in December. Inflation excluding food and fuel fell from 6.2 per cent in October to 5.7 per cent and 5.6 per cent in November and December, respectively. The impact of house rent allowance of central government employees has now faded, while there is an unusual spike in inflation in health and education. At the same time, there was also a moderation in inflation in transport and communication.

44. RBI’s projected trajectory of headline inflation has also somewhat softened to 2.8 per cent in Q4 of 2018-19 (down from 3.2 per cent in the last policy round) and 3.4 per cent in Q2 of 2019-20 (down from 4.2 per cent). Furthermore, various surveys signal moderation in inflation expectations. Inflation expectations in the December 2018 round of the Reserve Bank’s Survey of Households softened by 80 basis points and 130 basis points for three-month ahead and one-year ahead horizons, respectively, vis-à-vis the last round. The Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey indicates moderation in input prices in the fourth quarter of 2018-19, as reported by manufacturing firms. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for January 2019 suggests that input costs and selling prices remain modest. The Economic Cycle Research Institute’s (ECRI) Indian Future Inflation Gauge, a harbinger of inflation, has also declined, signalling a moderation in future inflation. One-year-ahead Business Inflation Expectations also declined in December, as per the Business Inflation Expectations Survey conducted by IIM-Ahmedabad for the month of December.

45. Looking forward, downside risks to the inflation outlook include continuing moderation in food inflation. The slowdown in global growth may also lead to softening of crude oil prices and moderation in inflation. Upside risks include supply disruptions in crude oil and geopolitical tensions.

46. On the output side, although RBI lowered its growth projection, GDP is expected to grow by 7.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2019-20, rising to 7.5 percent in Q3. Consumer Confidence has improved in the December 2018 round, with the future expectations index close to the all-time high of the December 2016 round. Forward looking indicators such as RBI’s Business Expectations Index for the manufacturing sector signal an improvement in the fourth quarter based on upbeat sentiments on production, order books, exports and capacity utilisation. These movements are corroborated by the January PMI. Meanwhile, growth in the Indian Leading Index, a predictor of the direction of Indian economic growth maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, has risen lately, indicating some improvement in economic growth prospects.

47. A major downside risk to growth is the continued global growth slowdown, along with trade tensions and associated uncertainties. Indeed, growth in ECRI’s Indian Leading Exports Index has weakened, dimming the exports growth outlook. According to ECRI’s leading indexes, U.S. economic growth is expected to continue to decelerate, while the inflation cycle is expected to remain in a downswing in the coming months, despite the Fed's abrupt U-turn. Furthermore, based on ECRI’s Chinese leading indexes, overall Chinese growth is expected to continue to languish for the time being, while Chinese industrial growth will stay in a downturn, in the months ahead. Eurozone economic growth prospects remain dismal, with Italy in recession and Germany and France getting closer to recessionary conditions. Thus, as per ECRI’s prognosis, overall global economic growth will continue to stay in a cyclical downswing, while inflation will decline in every major economy. This may not only halt central bank plans for policy "normalization", but also afford leeway for policy easing.

48. In light of the benign inflation outlook and a moderation in inflation expectations, as well as the likely headwinds due to the global growth slowdown, I vote for decreasing the policy repo rate by 25 basis points and changing the stance from calibrated tightening to neutral.